GIRL WITH A PEARL EARRING

A NOVEL BY TRACY CHEVALIER

This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents
are either the product of the author's imagination or are used
fictitiously, and any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead,
business establishments, events or locales is entirely coincidental.


A Penguin Book / published by arrangement with the author

All rights reserved.  Copyright © 1999 by Tracy Chevalier


This book may not be reproduced in whole or part, by mimeograph or any
other means, without permission. Making or distributing electronic
copies of this book constitutes copyright infringement and could
subject the infringer to criminal and civil liability.

***


For information address: The Berkley Publishing Group, a division of
Penguin Putnam Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014.

The Penguin Putnam Inc. World Wide Web site address is
http://www.penguinputnam.com

ISBN: 0-7865-2016-7

A PENGUIN BOOK®


Penguin Books first published by The Penguin Publishing Group, a
member of Penguin Putnam Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York
10014.  PENGUIN and the "P" design are trademarks belonging to Penguin
Putnam Inc.

First edition: August 1999 CONTENTS 1.   1664                7 2.
1665               77 3.   1666              145 4.   1676
184 For my father 1664

***

My mother did not tell me they were coming. Afterwards she said she
did not want me to appear nervous. I was surprised, for I thought she
knew me well. Strangers would think I was calm. I did not cry as a
baby. Only my mother would note the tightness along my jaw, the
widening of my already wide eyes.

I was chopping vegetables in the kitchen when I heard voices outside
our front door--a woman's, bright as polished brass, and a man's, low
and dark like the wood of the table I was working on. They were the
kind of voices we heard rarely in our house. I could hear rich carpets
in their voices, books and pearls and fur.

I was glad that earlier I had scrubbed the front steps so hard.

My mother's voice--a cooking pot, a flagon--approached from the front
room. They were coming to the kitchen. I pushed the leeks I had been
chopping into place, then set the knife on the table, wiped my hands
on my apron and pressed my lips together to smooth them.

My mother appeared in the doorway, her eyes two warnings. Behind her
the woman had to duck her head because she was so tall, taller than
the man following her.

All of our family, even my father and brother, were small.

The woman looked as if she had been blown about by the wind, although
it was a calm day. Her cap was askew so that tiny blond curls escaped
and hung about her forehead like bees which she swatted at impatiently
several times.  Her collar needed straightening and was not as crisp
as it could be. She pushed



her gray mantle back from her shoulders, and I saw then that under her
dark blue dress a baby was growing. It would arrive by the year's end,
or before.

The woman's face was like an oval serving plate, flashing at times,
dull at others. Her eyes were two light brown buttons, a color I had
rarely seen coupled with blond hair. She made a show of watching me
hard, but could not fix her attention on me, her eyes darting about
the room.

"This is the girl, then," she said abruptly.

"This is my daughter, Griet," my mother replied. I nodded respectfully
to the man and woman.

"Well. She's not very big. Is she strong enough?" As the woman turned
to look at the man, a fold of her mantle caught the handle of the
knife I had been using, knocking it off the table so that it spun
across the floor.

The woman cried out.

"Catharina," the man said calmly. He spoke her name as if he held
cinnamon in his mouth. The woman stopped, making an effort to quiet
herself.

I stepped over and picked up the knife, polishing the blade on my
apron before placing it back on the table. The knife had brushed
against the vegetables. I set a piece of carrot back in its place.

The man was watching me, his eyes grey like the sea. He had a long,
angular face, and his expression was steady, in contrast to his
wife's, which flickered like a candle. He had no beard or moustache,
and I was glad, for it gave him a clean appearance. He wore a black
cloak over his shoulders, a white shirt, and a fine lace collar. His
hat pressed into hair the red of brick washed by rain.

"What have you been doing here, Griet?" he asked.

I was surprised by the question but knew enough to hide it. "Chopping
vegetables, sir. For the soup."

I always laid vegetables out in a circle, each with its own section
like a slice of pie. There were five slices: red cabbage, onions,
leeks, carrots, and turnips. I had used a knife edge to shape each
slice, and placed a carrot disc in the center.



The man tapped his finger on the table. "Are they laid out in the
order in which they will go into the soup?" he suggested, studying the
circle.

"No, sir." I hesitated. I could not say why I had laid out the
vegetables as I did.  I simply set them as I felt they should be, but
I was too frightened to say so to a gentleman.

"I see you have separated the whites," he said, indicating the turnips
and onions. "And then the orange and the purple, they do not sit
together. Why is that?" He picked up a shred of cabbage and a piece of
carrot and shook them like dice in his hand.

I looked at my mother, who nodded slightly.

"The colors fight when they are side by side, sir."

He arched his eyebrows, as if he had not expected such a response.
"And do you spend much time setting out the vegetables before you make
the soup?"

"Oh no, sir," I replied, confused. I did not want him to think I was
idle.

From the corner of my eye I saw a movement. My sister, Agnes, was
peering round the doorpost and had shaken her head at my response. I
did not often lie.  I looked down.

The man turned his head slightly and Agnes disappeared. He dropped the
pieces of carrot and cabbage into their slices. The cabbage shred fell
partly into the onions. I wanted to reach over and tease it into
place. I did not, but he knew that I wanted to. He was testing me.

"That's enough prattle," the woman declared. Though she was annoyed
with his attention to me, it was me she frowned at. "Tomorrow, then?"
She looked at the man before sweeping out of the room, my mother
behind her. The man glanced once more at what was to be the soup, then
nodded at me and followed the women.

When my mother returned I was sitting by the vegetable wheel. I waited
for her to speak. She was hunching her shoulders as if against a
winter chill, though it was summer and the kitchen was hot.

"You are to start tomorrow as their maid. If you do well, you will be
paid eight stuivers a day. You will live with them."

I pressed my lips together.

"Don't look at me like that, Griet," my mother said. "We have to, now
your father has lost his trade."

"Where do they live?"

"On the Oude Langendijck, where it intersects with the Molenpoort."

"Papists' corner? They're Catholic?"

"You can come home Sundays. They have agreed to that." My mother
cupped her hands around the turnips, scooped them up along with some
of the cabbage and onions and dropped them into the pot of water
waiting on the fire. The pie slices I had made so carefully were
ruined.

***


I climbed the stairs to see my father. He was sitting at the front of
the attic by the window, where the light touched his face. It was the
closest he came now to seeing.

Father had been a tile painter, his fingers still stained blue from
painting cupids, maids, soldiers, ships, children, fish, flowers,
animals onto white tiles, glazing them, firing them, selling them. One
day the kiln exploded, taking his eyes and his trade. He was the lucky
one--two other men died.

I sat next to him and held his hand.

"I heard," he said before I could speak. "I heard everything." His
hearing had taken the strength from his missing eyes.

I could not think of anything to say that would not sound reproachful.

"I'm sorry, Griet. I would like to have done better for you." The
place where his eyes had been, where the doctor had sewn shut the
skin, looked sorrowful.  "But he is a good gentleman, and fair. He
will treat you well." He said nothing about the woman.

"How can you be sure of this, Father? Do you know him?"



"Don't you know who he is?"

"No."

"Do you remember the painting we saw in the Town Hall a few years ago,
which van Ruijven was displaying after he bought it? It was a view of
Delft, from the Rotterdam and Schiedam Gates. With the sky that took
up so much of the painting, and the sunlight on some of the
buildings."

"And the paint had sand in it to make the brickwork and the roofs look
rough," I added. "And there were long shadows in the water, and tiny
people on the shore nearest us."

"That's the one." Father's sockets widened as if he still had eyes and
was looking at the painting again.

I remembered it well, remembered thinking that I had stood at the very
spot many times and never seen Delft the way the painter had.

"That man was van Ruijven?"

"The patron?" Father chuckled. "No, no, child, not him. That was the
painter, Vermeer. That was Johannes Vermeer and his wife. You're to
clean his studio."

***


To the few things I was taking with me my mother added another cap,
collar and apron so that each day I could wash one and wear the other,
and would always look clean. She also gave me an ornamental
tortoiseshell comb, shaped like a shell, that had been my
grandmother's and was too fine for a maid to wear, and a prayer book I
could read when I needed to escape the Catholicism around me.

As we gathered my things she explained why I was to work for the
Vermeers.  "You know that your new master is headman of the Guild of
St. Luke, and was when your father had his accident last year?"

I nodded, still shocked that I was to work for such an artist.

"The Guild looks after its own, as best it can. Remember the box your
father gave money to every week for years? That money goes to masters
in need, as

we are now. But it goes only so far, you see, especially now with
Frans in his apprenticeship and no money coming in. We have no choice.
We won't take public charity, not if we can manage without. Then your
father heard that your new master was looking for a maid who could
clean his studio without moving anything, and he put forward your
name, thinking that as headman, and knowing our circumstances, Vermeer
would be likely to try to help."

I sifted through what she had said. "How do you clean a room without
moving anything?"

"Of course you must move things, but you must find a way to put them
back exactly so it looks as if nothing has been disturbed. As you do
for your father now that he cannot see."

After my father's accident we had learned to place things where he
always knew to find them. It was one thing to do this for a blind man,
though. Quite another for a man with a painter's eyes.

***


Agnes said nothing to me after the visit. When I got into bed next to
her that night she remained silent, though she did not turn her back
to me. She lay gazing at the ceiling. Once I had blown out the candle
it was so dark I could see nothing. I turned towards her.

"You know I don't want to leave. I have to."

Silence.

"We need the money. We have nothing now that Father can't work."

"Eight stuivers a day isn't such a lot of money." Agnes had a hoarse
voice, as if her throat were covered with cobwebs.

"It will keep the family in bread. And a bit of cheese. That's not so
little."

"I'll be all alone. You're leaving me all alone. First Frans, then
you."

Of all of us Agnes had been the most upset when Frans left the
previous year.  He and she had always fought like cats but she sulked
for days once he was gone. At ten she was the youngest of us three
children, and had never before known a time when Frans and I were not
there.

"Mother and Father will still be here. And I'll visit on Sundays.
Besides, it was no surprise when Frans went." We had known for years
that our brother would start his apprenticeship when he turned
thirteen. Our father had saved hard to pay the apprentice fee, and
talked endlessly of how Frans would learn another aspect of the trade,
then come back and they would set up a tile factory together.

Now our father sat by the window and never spoke of the future.

After the accident Frans had come home for two days. He had not
visited since. The last time I saw him I had gone to the factory
across town where he was apprenticed. He looked exhausted and had
burns up and down his arms from pulling tiles from the kiln. He told
me he worked from dawn until so late that at times he was too tired
even to eat. "Father never told me it would be this bad," he muttered
resentfully. "He always said his apprenticeship was the making of
him."

"Perhaps it was," I replied. "It made him what he is now."

***


When I was ready to leave the next morning my father shuffled out to
the front step, feeling his way along the wall. I hugged my mother and
Agnes. "Sunday will come in no time," my mother said.

My father handed me something wrapped in a handkerchief. "To remind
you of home," he said. "Of us."

It was my favorite tile of his. Most of his tiles we had at home were
faulty in some way--chipped or cut crookedly, or the picture was
blurred because the kiln had been too hot. This one, though, my father
kept specially for us. It was a simple picture of two small figures, a
boy and an older girl. They were not playing as children usually did
in tiles. They were simply walking along, and were like Frans and me
whenever we walked together--clearly our father had thought of us as he
painted it. The boy was a little ahead of the girl but had turned back
to say something. His face was mischievous, his hair messy. The girl
wore her cap as I wore mine, not as most other girls did, with the
ends tied under their chins or behind their necks. I favored a white
cap that folded in a wide brim around my face, covering my hair
completely and hanging down in points on each side of my face so that
from the side my expression was hidden.  I kept the cap stiff by
boiling it with potato peelings.



I walked away from our house, carrying my things tied up in an apron.
It was still early--our neighbors were throwing buckets of water onto
their steps and the street in front of their houses, and scrubbing
them clean. Agnes would do that now, as well as many of my other
tasks. She would have less time to play in the street and along the
canals. Her life was changing too.

People nodded at me and watched curiously as I passed. No one asked
where I was going or called out kind words. They did not need to--they
knew what happened to families when a man lost his trade. It would be
something to discuss later--young Griet become a maid, her father
brought the family low.  They would not gloat, however. The same thing
could easily happen to them.

I had walked along that street all my life, but had never been so
aware that my back was to my home. When I reached the end and turned
out of sight of my family, though, it became a little easier to walk
steadily and look around me.  The morning was still cool, the sky a
flat grey-white pulled close over Delft like a sheet, the summer sun
not yet high enough to burn it away. The canal I walked along was a
mirror of white light tinged with green. As the sun grew brighter the
canal would darken to the color of moss.

Frans, Agnes, and I used to sit along that canal and throw things
in--pebbles, sticks, once a broken tile--and imagine what they might
touch on the bottom--not fish, but creatures from our imagination, with
many eyes, scales, hands and fins. Frans thought up the most
interesting monsters. Agnes was the most frightened. I always stopped
the game, too inclined to see things as they were to be able to think
up things that were not.

There were a few boats on the canal, moving towards Market Square. It
was not market day, however, when the canal was so full you couldn't
see the water. One boat was carrying river fish for the stalls at
Jeronymous Bridge.  Another sat low on the water, loaded with bricks.
The man poling the boat called out a greeting to me. I merely nodded
and lowered my head so that the edge of my cap hid my face.

I crossed a bridge over the canal and turned into the open space of
Market Square, even then busy with people crisscrossing it on their
way to some task--buying meat at the Meat Hall, or bread at the
baker's, taking wood to be weighed at the Weigh House. Children ran
errands for their parents, apprentices for their masters, maids for
their households. Horses and carts clattered across the stones. To my
right was the Town Hall, with its gilded front and white marble faces
gazing down from the keystones above the windows. To my left was the
New Church, where I had been baptized sixteen years before. Its tall,
narrow tower made me think of a stone birdcage. Father had taken us up
it once. I would never forget the sight of Delft spread below

us, each narrow brick house and steep red roof and green waterway and
city gate marked forever in my mind, tiny and yet distinct. I asked my
father then if every Dutch city looked like that, but he did not know.
He had never visited any other city, not even The Hague, two hours
away on foot.

I walked to the center of the square. There the stones had been laid
to form an eight-pointed star set inside a circle. Each point aimed
towards a different part of Delft. I thought of it as the very center
of the town, and as the center of my life. Frans and Agnes and I had
played in that star since we were old enough to run to the market. In
our favorite game, one of us chose a point and one of us named a
thing--a stork, a church, a wheelbarrow, a flower--and we ran in that
direction looking for that thing. We had explored most of Delft that
way.

One point, however, we had never followed. I had never gone to
Papists' Corner, where the Catholics lived. The house where I was to
work was just ten minutes from home, the time it took a pot of water
to boil, but I had never passed by it.

I knew no Catholics. There were not so many in Delft, and none in our
street or in the shops we used. It was not that we avoided them, but
they kept to themselves. They were tolerated in Delft, but were
expected not to parade their faith openly. They held their services
privately, in modest places that did not look like churches from the
outside.

My father had worked with Catholics and told me they were no different
from us. If anything they were less solemn. They liked to eat and
drink and sing and game. He said this almost as if he envied them.

I followed that point of the star now, walking across the square more
slowly than everyone else, for I was reluctant to leave its
familiarity. I crossed the bridge over the canal and turned left up
the Oude Langendijck. On my left the canal ran parallel to the street,
separating it from Market Square.

At the intersection with the Molenpoort, four girls were sitting on a
bench beside an open door of a house. They were arranged in order of
size, from the oldest, who looked to be about Agnes' age, to the
youngest, who was probably about four. One of the middle girls held a
baby in her lap--a large baby, who was probably already crawling and
would soon be ready to walk.

Five children, I thought. And another expected.

The oldest was blowing bubbles through a scallop shell fixed to the
end of a hollowed stick, very like one my father had made for us. The
others were

jumping up and popping the bubbles as they appeared. The girl with the
baby in her lap could not move much, catching few bubbles although she
was seated next to the bubble blower. The youngest at the end was the
furthest away and the smallest, and had no chance to reach the
bubbles. The second youngest was the quickest, darting after the
bubbles and clapping her hands around them. She had the brightest hair
of the four, red like the dry brick wall behind her. The youngest and
the girl with the baby both had curly blond hair like their mother's,
while the eldest's was the same dark red as her father's.

I watched the girl with the bright hair swat at the bubbles, popping
them just before they broke on the damp grey and white tiles set
diagonally in rows before the house. She will be a handful, I thought.
"You'd best pop them before they reach the ground," I said. "Else
those tiles will have to be scrubbed again."

The eldest girl lowered the pipe. Four sets of eyes stared at me with
the same gaze that left no doubt they were sisters. I could see
various features of their parents in them--grey eyes here, light brown
eyes there, angular faces, impatient movements.

"Are you the new maid?" the eldest asked.

"We were told to watch out for you," the bright redhead interrupted
before I could reply.

"Cornelia, go and get Tanneke," the eldest said to her.

"You go, Aleydis," Cornelia in turn ordered the youngest, who gazed at
me with wide grey eyes but did not move.

"I'll go." The eldest must have decided my arrival was important after
all.

"No, I'll go." Cornelia jumped up and ran ahead of her older sister,
leaving me alone with the two quieter girls.

I looked at the squirming baby in the girl's lap. "Is that your
brother or your sister?"

"Brother," the girl replied in a soft voice like a feather pillow.
"His name is Johannes. Never call him Jan." She said the last words as
if they were a familiar refrain.



"I see. And your name?"

"Lisbeth. And this is Aleydis." The youngest smiled at me. They were
both dressed neatly in brown dresses with white aprons and caps.

"And your older sister?"

"Maertge. Never call her Maria. Our grandmother's name is Maria. Maria
Thins. This is her house."

The baby began to whimper. Lisbeth joggled him up and down on her
knee.

I looked up at the house. It was certainly grander than ours, but not
as grand as I had feared. It had two stories, plus an attic, whereas
ours had only the one, with a tiny attic. It was an end house, with
the Molenpoort running down one side, so that it was a little wider
than the other houses in the street. It felt less pressed in than many
of the houses in Delft, which were packed together in narrow rows of
brick along the canals, their chimneys and stepped roofs reflected in
the green canal water. The ground-floor windows of this house were
very high, and on the first floor there were three windows set close
together rather than the two of other houses along the street.

From the front of the house the New Church tower was visible just
across the canal. A strange view for a Catholic family, I thought. A
church they will never even go inside.

"So you're the maid, are you?" I heard behind me.

The woman standing in the doorway had a broad face, pockmarked from an
earlier illness. Her nose was bulbous and irregular, and her thick
lips were pushed together to form a small mouth. Her eyes were light
blue, as if she had caught the sky in them. She wore a grey-brown
dress with a white chemise, a cap tied tight around her head, and an
apron that was not as clean as mine. She stood blocking the doorway,
so that Maertge and Cornelia had to push their way out round her, and
looked at me with crossed arms as if waiting for a challenge.

Already she feels threatened by me, I thought. She will bully me if I
let her.

"My name is Griet," I said, gazing at her levelly. "I am the new
maid."

***


The woman shifted from one hip to the other. "You'd best come in,
then," she said after a moment. She moved back into the shadowy
interior so that the doorway was clear.

I stepped across the threshold.

What I always remembered about being in the front hall for the first
time were the paintings. I stopped inside the door, clutching my
bundle, and stared. I had seen paintings before, but never so many in
one room. I counted eleven. The largest painting was of two men,
almost naked, wrestling each other. I did not recognize it as a story
from the Bible, and wondered if it was a Catholic subject. Other
paintings were of more familiar things--piles of fruit, landscapes,
ships on the sea, portraits. They seemed to be by several painters. I
wondered which of them were my new master's. None was what I had
expected of him.

Later I discovered they were all by other painters--he rarely kept his
own finished paintings in the house. He was an art dealer as well as
an artist, and paintings hung in almost every room, even where I
slept. There were more than fifty in all, though the number varied
over time as he traded and sold them.

"Come now, no need to idle and gape." The woman hurried down a lengthy
hallway, which ran along one side of the house all the way to the
back. I followed as she turned abruptly into a room on the left. On
the wall directly opposite hung a painting that was larger than me. It
was of Christ on the cross, surrounded by the Virgin Mary, Mary
Magdalene, and St. John. I tried not to stare but I was amazed by its
size and subject. "Catholics are not so different from us," my father
had said. But we did not have such pictures in our houses, or our
churches, or anywhere. Now I would see this painting every day.

I was always to think of that room as the Crucifixion room. I was
never comfortable in it.

The painting surprised me so much that I did not notice the woman in
the corner until she spoke. "Well, girl," she said, "that is something
new for you to see." She sat in a comfortable chair, smoking a pipe.
Her teeth gripping the stem had gone brown, and her fingers were
stained with ink. The rest of her was spotless--her black dress, lace
collar, stiff white cap. Though her lined face was stern her light
brown eyes seemed amused.

She was the kind of old woman who looked as if she would outlive
everyone.



She is Catharina's mother, I thought suddenly. It was not just the
color of her eyes and the wisp of grey curl that escaped her cap in
the same way as her daughter's. She had the manner of someone used to
looking after those less able than she--of looking after Catharina. I
understood now why I had been brought to her rather than her daughter.

Though she seemed to look at me casually, her gaze was watchful. When
she narrowed her eyes I realized she knew everything I was thinking. I
turned my head so that my cap hid my face.

Maria Thins puffed on her pipe and chuckled. "That's right, girl. You
keep your thoughts to yourself here. So, you're to work for my
daughter. She's out now, at the shops. Tanneke here will show you
round and explain your duties."

I nodded. "Yes, madam."

Tanneke, who had been standing at the old woman's side, pushed past
me. I followed, Maria Thins' eyes branding my back. I heard her
chuckling again.

Tanneke took me first to the back of the house, where there were
cooking and washing kitchens and two storage rooms. The washing
kitchen led out to a tiny courtyard full of drying white laundry.

"This needs ironing, for a start," Tanneke said. I said nothing,
though it looked as if the laundry had not yet been bleached properly
by the midday sun.

She led me back inside and pointed to a hole in the floor of one of
the storage rooms, a ladder leading down into it. "You're to sleep
there," she announced.  "Drop your things there now and you can sort
yourself out later."

I reluctantly let my bundle drop into the dim hole, thinking of the
stones Agnes and Frans and I had thrown into the canal to seek out the
monsters. My things thudded onto the dirt floor. I felt like an apple
tree losing its fruit.

I followed Tanneke back along the hallway, which all the rooms opened
off-- many more rooms than in our house. Next to the Crucifixion room
where Maria Thins sat, towards the front of the house, was a smaller
room with children's beds, chamberpots, small chairs and a table, on
it various earthenware, candlesticks, snuffers, and clothing, all in a
jumble.

"The girls sleep here," Tanneke mumbled, perhaps embarrassed by the
mess.



She turned up the hallway again and opened a door into a large room,
where light streamed in from the front windows and across the red and
grey tiled floor. "The great hall," she muttered. "Master and mistress
sleep here."

Their bed was hung with green silk curtains. There was other furniture
in the room--a large cupboard inlaid with ebony, a whitewood table
pushed up to the windows with several Spanish leather chairs arranged
around it. But again it was the paintings that struck me. More hung in
this room than anywhere else. I counted to nineteen silently. Most
were portraits--they appeared to be members of both families. There was
also a painting of the Virgin Mary, and one of the three kings
worshipping the Christ Child. I gazed at both uneasily.

"Now, upstairs." Tanneke went first up the steep stairs, then put a
finger to her lips. I climbed as quietly as I could. At the top I
looked around and saw the closed door. Behind it was a silence that I
knew was him.

I stood, my eyes fixed on the door, not daring to move in case it
opened and he came out.

Tanneke leaned towards me and whispered, "You'll be cleaning in there,
which the young mistress will explain to you later. And these
rooms"--she pointed to the doors towards the back of the house--"are my
mistress's rooms.  Only I go in there to clean."

We crept downstairs again. When we were back in the washing kitchen
Tanneke said, "You're to take on the laundry for the house." She
pointed to a great mound of clothes--they had fallen far behind with
their washing. I would struggle to catch up. "There's a cistern in the
cooking kitchen but you'd best get your water for washing from the
canal--it's clean enough in this part of town."

"Tanneke," I said in a low voice, "have you been doing all this
yourself? The cooking and cleaning and washing for the house?"

I had chosen the right words. "And some of the shopping." Tanneke
puffed up with pride at her own industry. "Young mistress does most of
it, of course, but she goes off raw meat and fish when she's carrying
a child. And that's often," she added in a whisper. "You're to go to
the Meat Hall and the fish stalls too.  That will be another of your
duties."

With that she left me to the laundry. Including me, there were ten of
us now in the house, one a baby who would dirty more clothes than the
rest. I would be laundering every day, my hands chapped and cracked
from the soap and water,

my face red from standing over the steam, my back aching from lifting
wet cloth, my arms burned by the iron. But I was new and I was
young--it was to be expected I would have the hardest tasks.

The laundry needed to soak for a day before I could wash it. In the
storage room that led down to the cellar I found two pewter waterpots
and a copper kettle. I took the pots with me and walked up the long
hallway to the front door.

The girls were sitting on the bench. Now Lisbeth had the bubble blower
while Maertge fed baby Johannes bread softened with milk. Cornelia and
Aleydis were chasing bubbles. When I appeared they all stopped what
they were doing and looked at me expectantly.

"You're the new maid," the girl with the bright red hair declared.

"Yes, Cornelia."

Cornelia picked up a pebble and threw it across the road into the
canal. There were long scratches up and down her arm--she must have
been bothering the house cat.

"Where will you sleep?" Maertge asked, wiping mushy fingers on her
apron.

"In the cellar."

"We like it down there," Cornelia said. "Let's go and play there now!"

She darted inside but did not go far. When no one followed her she
came back out, her face cross.

"Aleydis," I said, extending my hand to the youngest girl, "will you
show me where to get water from the canal?"

She took my hand and looked up at me. Her eyes were like two shiny
grey coins. We crossed the street, Cornelia and Lisbeth following.
Aleydis led me to stairs that descended to the water. As we peeked
over I tightened my grip on her hand, as I had done years before with
Frans and Agnes whenever we stood next to water.

***



"You stand back from the edge," I ordered. Aleydis obediently took a
step back. But Cornelia followed close behind me as I carried the pots
down the steps.

"Cornelia, are you going to help me carry the water? If not, go back
up to your sisters."

She looked at me, and then she did the worst thing. If she had sulked
or shouted, I would know I had mastered her. Instead she laughed.

I reached over and slapped her. Her face turned red, but she did not
cry. She ran back up the steps. Aleydis and Lisbeth peered down at me
solemnly.

I had a feeling then. This is how it will be with her mother, I
thought, except that I will not be able to slap her.

I filled the pots and carried them to the top of the steps. Cornelia
had disappeared. Maertge was still sitting with Johannes. I took one
of the pots inside and back to the cooking kitchen, where I built up
the fire, filled the copper kettle, and put it on to heat.

When I came back Cornelia was outside again, her face still flushed.
The girls were playing with tops on the grey and white tiles. None of
them looked up at me.

The pot I had left was missing. I looked into the canal and saw it
floating, upside down, just out of reach of the stairs.

"Yes, you will be a handful," I murmured. I looked around for a stick
to fish it out with but could find none. I filled the other pot again
and carried it inside, turning my head so that the girls could not see
my face. I set the pot next to the kettle on the fire. Then I went
outside again, this time with a broom.

Cornelia was throwing stones at the pot, probably hoping to sink it.

"I'll slap you again if you don't stop."

"I'll tell our mother. Maids don't slap us." Cornelia threw another
stone.

"Shall I tell your grandmother what you've done?"

A fearful look crossed Cornelia's face. She dropped the stones she
held.

A boat was moving along the canal from the direction of the Town Hall.
I recognized the man poling from earlier that day--he had delivered his
load of bricks and the boat was riding much higher. He grinned when he
saw me.

I blushed. "Please, sir," I began, "can you help me get that pot?"

"Oh, you're looking at me now that you want something from me, are
you?  There's a change!"

Cornelia was watching me curiously.

I swallowed. "I can't reach the pot from here. Perhaps you could--"

The man leaned over, fished out the pot, dumped the water from it, and
held it out to me. I ran down the steps and took it from him. "Thank
you. I'm most grateful."

He did not let go of the pot. "Is that all I get? No kiss?" He reached
over and pulled my sleeve. I jerked my arm away and wrestled the pot
from him.

"Not this time," I said as lightly as I could. I was never good at
that sort of talk.

He laughed. "I'll be looking for pots every time I pass here now,
won't I, young miss?" He winked at Cornelia. "Pots and kisses." He
took up his pole and pushed off.

As I climbed the steps back to the street I thought I saw a movement
in the middle window on the first floor, the room where he was. I
stared but could see nothing except the reflected sky.

***


Catharina returned while I was taking down laundry in the courtyard. I
first heard her keys jangling in the hallway. They hung in a great
bunch just below her waist, bouncing against her hip. Although they
looked uncomfortable to me, she wore them with great pride. I then
heard her in the cooking kitchen, giving orders to Tanneke and the boy
who had carried things from the shops for her. She spoke harshly to
both.

I continued to pull down and fold bedsheets, napkins, pillowcases,
tablecloths, shirts, chemises, aprons, handkerchiefs, collars, caps.
They had been hung carelessly, bunched in places so that patches of
cloth were still damp. And they had not been shaken first, so there
were creases everywhere. I would be ironing much of the day to make
them presentable.

Catharina appeared at the door, looking hot and tired, though the sun
was not yet at its highest. Her chemise puffed out messily from the
top of her blue dress, and the green housecoat she wore over it was
already crumpled. Her blond hair was frizzier than ever, especially as
she wore no cap to smooth it.  The curls fought against the combs that
held them in a bun.

She looked as if she needed to sit quietly for a moment by the canal,
where the sight of the water might calm and cool her.

I was not sure how I should be with her--I had never been a maid, nor
had we ever had one in our house. There were no servants on our
street. No one could afford one. I placed the laundry I was folding in
a basket, then nodded at her.  "Good morning, madam."

She frowned and I realized I should have let her speak first. I would
have to take more care with her.

"Tanneke has taken you round the house?" she said.

"Yes, madam."

"Well, then, you will know what to do and you will do it." She
hesitated, as if at a loss for words, and it came to me that she knew
little more about being my mistress than I did about being her maid.
Tanneke had probably been trained by Maria Thins and still followed
her orders, whatever Catharina said to her.

I would have to help her without seeming to.

"Tanneke has explained that besides the laundry you want me to go for
the meat and fish, madam," I suggested gently.

Catharina brightened. "Yes. She will take you when you finish with the
washing here. After that you will go every day yourself. And on other
errands as I need you," she added.

"Yes, madam." I waited. When she said nothing else I reached up to
pull a man's linen shirt from the line.

Catharina stared at the shirt. "Tomorrow," she announced as I was
folding it, "I will show you upstairs where you are to clean.
Early--first thing in the morning." Before I could reply she
disappeared inside.

After I brought in the laundry I found the iron, cleaned it, and set
it in the fire to heat. I had just begun ironing when Tanneke came and
handed me a shopping pail. "We're going to the butcher's now," she
said. "I'll need the meat soon." I had heard her clattering in the
cooking kitchen and had smelled parsnips roasting.

Out in front Catharina sat on the bench, with Lisbeth on a stool by
her feet and Johannes asleep in a cradle. She was combing Lisbeth's
hair and searching for lice. Next to her Cornelia and Aleydis were
sewing. "No, Aleydis," Catharina was saying, "pull the thread tight,
that's too loose. You show her, Cornelia."

I had not thought they could all be so calm together.

Maertge ran over from the canal. "Are you going to the butcher's? May
I go too, Mama?"

"Only if you stay with Tanneke and mind her."

I was glad that Maertge came with us. Tanneke was still wary of me,
but Maertge was merry and quick and that made it easier for us to be
friendly.

I asked Tanneke how long she had worked for Maria Thins.

"Oh, many years," she said. "A few before master and young mistress
were married and came to live here. I started when I was no older than
you. How old are you, then?"

"Sixteen."

"I began when I was fourteen," Tanneke countered triumphantly. "Half
my life I've worked here."

I would not have said such a thing with pride. Her work had worn her
so that she looked older than her twenty-eight years.

The Meat Hall was just behind the Town Hall, south and to the west of
Market Square. Inside were thirty-two stalls--there had been
thirty-two butchers in Delft for generations. It was busy with
housewives and maids choosing, bartering and buying for their
families, and men carrying carcasses back and forth. Sawdust on the
floor soaked up blood and clung to shoes and hems of dresses. There
was a tang of blood in the air that always made me shiver, though at
one time I had gone there every week and ought to have grown used to
the smell. Still, I was pleased to be in a familiar place. As we
passed between the stalls the butcher we used to buy our meat from
before my father's accident called out to me. I smiled at him,
relieved to see a face I knew. It was the first time I had smiled all
day.

It was strange to meet so many new people and see so many new things
in one morning, and to do so apart from all the familiar things that
made up my life.  Before, if I met someone new I was always surrounded
by family and neighbors. If I went to a new place I was with Frans or
my mother or father and felt no threat. The new was woven in with the
old, like the darning in a sock.

Frans told me not long after he began his apprenticeship that he had
almost run away, not from the hard work, but because he could not face
the strangeness day after day. What kept him there was knowing that
our father had spent all his savings on the apprentice fee, and would
have sent him right back if he had come home. Besides, he would find
much more strangeness out in the world if he went elsewhere.

"I will come and see you," I whispered to the butcher, "when I am
alone." Then I hurried to catch up with Tanneke and Maertge.

They had stopped at a stall farther along. The butcher there was a
handsome man, with graying blond curls and bright blue eyes.

"Pieter, this is Griet," Tanneke said. "She will be fetching the meat
for us now.  You're to add it to our account as usual."

I tried to keep my eyes on his face, but I could not help glancing
down at his blood-splattered apron. Our butcher always wore a clean
apron when he was selling, changing it whenever he got blood on it.

"Ah." Pieter looked me over as if I were a plump chicken he was
considering roasting. "What would you like today, Griet?"

I turned to Tanneke. "Four pounds of chops and a pound of tongue," she
ordered.

Pieter smiled. "And what do you think of that, miss?" he addressed
Maertge.  "Don't I sell the best tongue in Delft?"

Maertge nodded and giggled as she gazed at the display of joints,
chops, tongue, pigs' feet, sausages.

"You'll find, Griet, that I have the best meat and the most honest
scales in the hall," Pieter remarked as he weighed the tongue. "You'll
have no complaints about me."

I stared at his apron and swallowed. Pieter put the chops and tongue
into the pail I carried, winked at me and turned to serve the next
customer.

We went next to the fish stalls, just beside the Meat Hall. Seagulls
hovered above the stalls, waiting for the fishheads and innards the
fishmongers threw into the canal. Tanneke introduced me to their
fishmonger--also different from ours. I was to alternate each day
between meat and fish.

When we left I did not want to go back to the house, to Catharina and
the children on the bench. I wanted to walk home. I wanted to step
into my mother's kitchen and hand her the pailful of chops. We had not
eaten meat in months.

***


Catharina was combing through Cornelia's hair when we returned. They
paid no attention to me. I helped Tanneke with dinner, turning the
meat on the grill, fetching things for the table in the great hall,
cutting the bread.

When the meal was ready the girls came in, Maertge joining Tanneke in
the cooking kitchen while the others sat down in the great hall. I had
just placed the tongue in the meat barrel in one of the storage
rooms--Tanneke had left it out and the cat had almost got to it--when he
appeared from outside, standing in the doorway at the end of the long
hall, wearing his hat and cloak. I stood still and he paused, the
light behind him so that I could not see his face. I did not know if
he was looking down the hallway at me. After a moment he disappeared
into the great hall.

Tanneke and Maertge served while I looked after the baby in the
Crucifixion room. When Tanneke was done she joined me and we ate and
drank what the family did--chops, parsnips, bread, and mugs of beer.
Although Pieter's meat was no better than our family butcher's, it was
a welcome taste after going so long without. The bread was rye rather
than the cheaper brown bread we had been eating, and the beer was not
so watery either.

I did not wait on the family at that dinner and so I did not see him.
Occasionally I heard his voice, usually along with Maria Thins'. From
their tones it was clear they got on well.

After dinner Tanneke and I cleared up, then mopped the floors of the
kitchens and storage rooms. The walls of each kitchen were tiled in
white, and the fireplace in blue and white Delft tiles painted with
birds in one section, ships in another, and soldiers in another. I
studied them carefully, but none had been painted by my father.

I spent most of the rest of the day ironing in the washing kitchen,
occasionally stopping to build up the fire, fetch wood, or step into
the courtyard to escape the heat. The girls played in and out of the
house, sometimes coming in to watch me and poke at the fire, another
time to tease Tanneke when they found her asleep next door in the
cooking kitchen, Johannes crawling around her feet. They were a little
uneasy with me--perhaps they thought I might slap them. Cornelia
scowled at me and did not stay long in the room, but Maertge and
Lisbeth took the clothes I had ironed and put them away for me in the
cupboard in the great hall. Their mother was asleep there. "The last
month before the baby comes she'll stay in bed much of the day,"
Tanneke confided, "propped up with pillows all around her."

Maria Thins had gone to her upstairs rooms after dinner. Once, though,
I heard her in the hallway and when I looked up she was standing in
the doorway, watching me. She said nothing, so I turned back to my
ironing and pretended she wasn't there. After a moment out of the
corner of my eye I saw her nod and shuffle off.

He had a guest upstairs--I heard two male voices as they climbed up.
Later when I heard them coming down I peeked around the door to watch
them go out. The man with him was plump and wore a long white feather
in his hat.

When it got dark we lit candles, and Tanneke and I had bread and
cheese and beer with the children in the Crucifixion room while the
others ate tongue in the great hall. I was careful to sit with my back
to the Crucifixion scene. I was so exhausted I could hardly think. At
home I had worked just as hard but it was never so tiring as in a
strange house where everything was new and I was always tense and
serious. At home I had been able to laugh with my mother or Agnes or
Frans. Here there was no one to laugh with.

I had not yet been down to the cellar where I was to sleep. I took a
candle with me but was too tired to look around beyond finding a bed,
pillow and blanket.  Leaving the trap door of the cellar open so that
cool, fresh air could reach me, I took off my shoes, cap, apron and
dress, prayed briefly, and lay down. I was about to blow out the
candle when I noticed the painting hanging at the foot of my bed. I
sat up, wide awake now. It was another picture of Christ on the Cross,
smaller than the one upstairs but even more disturbing. Christ had
thrown his head back in pain, and Mary Magdalene's eyes were rolling.
I Iay back gingerly, unable to take my eyes off it. I could not
imagine sleeping in the room with the painting. I wanted to take it
down but did not dare. Finally I blew out the candle--I could not
afford to waste candles on my first day in the new house. I lay back
again, my eyes fixed to the place where I knew the painting hung.

I slept badly that night, tired as I was. I woke often and looked for
the painting. Though I could see nothing on the wall, every detail was
fixed in my mind. Finally, when it was beginning to grow light, the
painting appeared again and I was sure the Virgin Mary was looking
down at me.

***


When I got up in the morning I tried not to look at the painting,
instead studying the contents of the cellar in the dim light that fell
through the window in the storage room above me. There was not much to
see--several tapestry- covered chairs piled up, a few other broken
chairs, a mirror, and two more paintings, both still lifes, leaning
against the wall. Would anyone notice if I replaced the Crucifixion
with a still life?

Cornelia would. And she would tell her mother.

I did not know what Catharina--or any of them--thought of my being
Protestant. It was a curious feeling, having to be aware of it myself.
I had never before been outnumbered.

I turned my back on the painting and climbed the ladder. Catharina's
keys were clinking at the front of the house and I went to find her.
She moved slowly, as if she were half asleep, but she made an effort
to draw herself up when she saw me. She led me up the stairs, climbing
slowly, holding tightly to the rail to pull her bulk up.

At the studio she searched among the keys, then unlocked and pushed
open the door. The room was dark, the shutters closed--I could make out
only a little from the cracks of light streaming in between them. The
room gave off a
clean, sharp odor of linseed oil that reminded me of my father's
clothes when he had returned from the tile factory at night. It
smelled like wood and fresh- cut hay mixed together.

Catharina remained on the threshold. I did not dare enter before her.
After an awkward moment she ordered, "Open the shutters, then. Not the
window on the left. Just the middle and far windows. And only the
lower part of the middle window."

I crossed the room, edging around an easel and chair to the middle
window. I pulled open the lower window, then opened out the shutters.
I did not look at the painting on the easel, not while Catharina was
watching me from the doorway.

A table had been pushed up against the window on the right, with a
chair set in the corner. The chair's back and seat were of leather
tooled with yellow flowers and leaves.

"Don't move anything over there," Catharina reminded me. "That is what
he is painting."

Even if I stood on my toes I was too small to reach the upper window
and shutters. I would have to stand on the chair, but did not want to
do so in front of her. She made me nervous, waiting in the doorway for
me to make a mistake.

I considered what to do.

It was the baby who saved me--he began wailing downstairs. Catharina
shifted from one hip to the other. As I hesitated she grew impatient
and finally left to tend to Johannes.

I quickly climbed up and stood carefully on the wooden frame of the
chair, pulled open the upper window, leaned out and pushed the
shutters open.  Peeking down at the street below, I spied Tanneke
scrubbing the tiles in front of the house. She did not see me, but a
cat padding across the wet tiles behind her paused and looked up.

I opened the lower window and shutters and got down from the chair.
Something moved in front of me and I froze. The movement stopped. It
was me, reflected in a mirror that hung on the wall between the two
windows. I gazed at myself. Although I had an anxious, guilty
expression, my face was
also bathed in light, making my skin glow. I stared, surprised, then
stepped away.

Now that I had a moment I surveyed the room. It was a large, square
space, not as long as the great hall downstairs. With the windows open
it was bright and airy, with white-washed walls, and grey and white
marble tiles on the floor, the darker tiles set in a pattern of square
crosses. A row of Delft tiles painted with cupids lined the bottom of
the walls to protect the whitewash from our mops. They were not my
father's.

Though it was a big room, it held little furniture. There was the
easel and chair set in front of the middle window, and the table
placed in front of the window in the right corner. Besides the chair I
had stood on there was another by the table, of plain leather nailed
on with brass studs and two lion heads carved into the tops of the
posts. Against the far wall, behind the chair and easel, was a small
cupboard, its drawers closed, several brushes and a knife with a
diamond-shaped blade arranged on top next to clean palettes. Beside
the cupboard was a desk on which were papers and books and prints. Two
more lion-head chairs had been set against the wall near the doorway.

It was an orderly room, empty of the clutter of everyday life. It felt
different from the rest of the house, almost as if it were in another
house altogether.  When the door was closed it would be difficult to
hear the shouts of the children, the jangle of Catharina's keys, the
sweeping of our brooms.

I took up my broom, bucket of water, and dustcloth and began to clean.
I started in the corner where the scene of the painting had been set
up, where I knew I must not move a thing. I kneeled on the chair to
dust the window I had struggled to open, and the yellow curtain that
hung to one side of it in the corner, touching it lightly so that I
would not disturb its folds. The panes of glass were dirty and needed
scrubbing with warm water, but I was not sure if he wanted them clean.
I would have to ask Catharina.

I dusted the chairs, polishing the brass studs and lion heads. The
table had not been cleaned properly in some time. Someone had wiped
around the objects placed there--a powder-brush, a pewter bowl, a
letter, a black ceramic pot, blue cloth heaped to one side and hanging
over the edge--but they had to be moved for the table really to be
cleaned. As my mother had said, I would have to find a way to move
things yet put them back exactly as if they had not been touched.

The letter lay close to the corner of the table. If I placed my thumb
along one edge of the paper, my second finger along another, and
anchored my hand


with my smallest finger hooked to the table edge, I should be able to
move the letter, dust there, and replace it where my hand indicated.

I laid my fingers against the edges and drew in my breath, then
removed the letter, dusted, and replaced it all in one quick movement.
I was not sure why I felt I had to do it quickly. I stood back from
the table. The letter seemed to be in the right place, though only he
would really know.

Still, if this was to be my test, I had best get it done.

From the letter I measured with my hand to the powder-brush, then
placed my fingers at various points around one side of the brush. I
removed it, dusted, replaced it, and measured the space between it and
the letter. I did the same with the bowl.

This was how I cleaned without seeming to move anything. I measured
each thing in relation to the objects around it and the space between
them. The small things on the table were easy, the furniture harder--I
used my feet, my knees, sometimes my shoulders and chin with the
chairs.

I did not know what to do with the blue cloth heaped messily on the
table. I would not be able to get the folds exact if I moved the
cloth. For now I left it alone, hoping that for a day or two he would
not notice until I had found a way to clean it.

With the rest of the room I could be less careful. I dusted and swept
and mopped--the floor, the walls, the windows, the furniture--with the
satisfaction of tackling a room in need of a good cleaning. In the far
corner, opposite the table and window, a door led to a storeroom,
filled with paintings and canvases, chairs, chests, dishes, bedpans, a
coat rack and a row of books. I cleaned in there too, tidying the
things away so that there was more order to the room.

All the while I had avoided cleaning around the easel. I did not know
why, but I was nervous about seeing the painting that sat on it. At
last, though, there was nothing left to do. I dusted the chair in
front of the easel, then began to dust the easel itself, trying not to
look at the painting.

When I glimpsed the yellow satin, however, I had to stop.

I was still staring at the painting when Maria Thins spoke.



"Not a common sight, now, is it?"

I had not heard her come in. She stood inside the doorway, slightly
stooped, wearing a fine black dress and lace collar.

I did not know what to say, and I couldn't help it--I turned back to
the painting.

Maria Thins laughed. "You're not the only one to forget your manners
in front of one of his paintings, girl." She came over to stand beside
me. "Yes, he's managed this one well. That's van Ruijven's wife." I
recognized the name as the patron my father had mentioned. "She's not
beautiful but he makes her so," she added. "It will fetch a good
price."

Because it was the first painting of his I was to see, I always
remembered it better than the others, even those I saw grow from the
first layer of underpaint to the final highlights.

A woman stood in front of a table, turned towards a mirror on the wall
so that she was in profile. She wore a mantle of rich yellow satin
trimmed with white ermine, and a fashionable five-pointed red ribbon
in her hair. A window lit her from the left, falling across her face
and tracing the delicate curve of her forehead and nose. She was tying
a string of pearls around her neck, holding the ribbons up, her hands
suspended in the air. Entranced with herself in the mirror, she did
not seem to be aware that anyone was looking at her. Behind her on a
bright white wall was an old map, in the dark foreground the table
with the letter on it, the powder-brush and the other things I had
dusted around.

I wanted to wear the mantle and the pearls. I wanted to know the man
who painted her like that.

I thought of me looking at my reflection in the mirror earlier and was
ashamed.

Maria Thins seemed content to stand with me and contemplate the
painting. It was odd to look at it with the setting just behind it.
Already from my dusting I knew all of the objects on the table, and
their relation to one another--the letter by the corner, the
powder-brush lying casually next to the pewter bowl, the blue cloth
bunched around the dark pot. Everything seemed to be exactly the same,
except cleaner and purer. It made a mockery of my own cleaning.

Then I saw a difference. I drew in my breath.

"What is it, girl?"

"In the painting there are no lion heads on the chair next to the
woman," I said.

"No. There was once a lute sitting on that chair as well. He makes
plenty of changes. He doesn't paint just what he sees, but what will
suit. Tell me, girl, do you think this painting is done?"

I stared at her. Her question must be a trick but I could not imagine
any change that would make it better.

"Isn't it?" I faltered.

Maria Thins snorted. "He's been working on it for three months. I
expect he'll do so for two more months. He will change things. You'll
see." She looked around. "Done your cleaning, have you? Well, then, go
on, girl--go to your other tasks. He'll come soon to see how you've
done."

I looked at the painting one last time, but by studying it so hard I
felt something slip away. It was like looking at a star in the night
sky--if I looked at one directly I could barely see it, but if I looked
from the corner of my eye it became much brighter.

I gathered my broom and bucket and cloth. When I left the room, Maria
Thins was still standing in front of the painting.

***


I filled the pots from the canal and set them on the fire, then went
to find Tanneke. She was in the room where the girls slept, helping
Cornelia to dress while Maertge helped Aleydis and Lisbeth helped
herself. Tanneke was not in good spirits, glancing at me only to
ignore me as I tried to speak to her. Finally I stood directly in
front of her so that she had to look at me. "Tanneke, I'll go to the
fish stalls now. What would you like today?"

"Going so early? We always go later in the day." Tanneke still did not
look at me. She was tying white ribbons into five-pointed stars in
Cornelia's hair.

"I'm free while the water is heating and thought I would go now," I
replied simply. I did not add that the best cuts were to be had early,
even if the butcher or fishmonger promised to set aside things for the
family. She should know that. "What would you like?"

"Don't fancy fish today. Go to the butcher's for a mutton joint."
Tanneke finished with the ribbons and Cornelia jumped up and pushed
past me.  Tanneke turned away and opened a chest to search for
something. I watched her broad back for a moment, the greyish brown
dress pulled tight across it.

She was jealous of me. I had cleaned the studio, where she was not
allowed, where no one, it seemed, could go except me and Maria Thins.

When Tanneke straightened, a bonnet in her hand, she said, "The master
painted me once, you know. Painted me pouring milk. Everyone said it
was his best painting."

"I'd like to see it," I responded. "Is it still here?"

"Oh no, van Ruijven bought it."

I thought for a moment. "So one of Delft's wealthiest men takes
pleasure in looking at you each day."

Tanneke grinned, her pocked face growing even wider. The right words
changed her mood in a moment. It was simply up to me to find the
words.

I turned to go before her mood could sour. "May I come with you?"
Maertge asked.

"And me?" Lisbeth added.

"Not today," I said firmly. "You have something to eat and help
Tanneke." I did not want it to become habit for the girls to accompany
me. I would use it as a reward for minding me.

I was also longing to walk in familiar streets on my own, not to have
a constant reminder of my new life chattering at my side. As I stepped
into Market Square, leaving Papists' Corner behind, I breathed in
deeply. I had not realized that I had been holding myself in tight all
the time I was with the family.

Before going to Pieter's stall I stopped at the butcher I knew, who
beamed when he saw me. "At last you decide to say hello! What,
yesterday you were too grand for the likes of me?" he teased.

***


I started to explain my new situation but he interrupted me. "Of
course I know.  Everyone is talking--Jan the tiler's daughter has gone
to work for the painter Vermeer. And then I see after one day she is
already too proud to speak to old friends!"

"I have nothing to be so proud of, becoming a maid. My father is
ashamed."

"Your father was simply unlucky. No one is blaming him. There is no
need for you to be ashamed, my dear. Except of course that you are not
buying your meat from me."

"I have no choice, I'm afraid. That's for my mistress to decide."

"Oh, it is, is it? So your buying from Pieter has nothing to do with
his handsome son?"

I frowned. "I have not seen his son."

The butcher laughed. "You will, you will. Off you go. When you see
your mother next tell her to come and see me. I will set aside
something for her."

I thanked him and passed along the stalls to Pieter's. He seemed
surprised to see me. "Here already, are you? Couldn't wait to get here
for more of that tongue?"

"I'd like a joint of mutton today, please."

"Now tell me, Griet, was that not the best tongue you have had?"

I refused to give him the compliment he craved. "The master and
mistress ate it. They did not remark on it."

Behind Pieter a young man turned round--he had been cutting into a side
of beef at a table behind the stall. He must have been the son, for
though he was taller than his father, he had the same bright blue
eyes. His blond hair was long and thick with curls, framing a face
that made me think of apricots. Only his bloody apron was displeasing
to the eye.

His eyes came to rest on me like a butterfly on a flower and I could
not keep from blushing. I repeated my request for mutton, keeping my
eyes on his father. Pieter rummaged through his meat and pulled out a
joint for me, laying it on the counter. Two sets of eyes watched me.

The joint was grey at the edges. I sniffed the meat. "This is not
fresh," I said bluntly. "Mistress will be none too pleased that you
expect her family to eat meat such as this." My tone was haughtier
than I had intended. Perhaps it needed to be.

Father and son stared at me. I held the gaze of the father, trying to
ignore the son.

At last Pieter turned to his son. "Pieter, get me that joint set aside
on the cart."

"But that's meant for--" Pieter the son stopped. He disappeared,
returning with another joint, which I could immediately see was
superior. I nodded.  "That's better."

Pieter the son wrapped the joint and placed it in my pail. I thanked
him. As I turned to go I caught the glance that passed between father
and son. Even then I knew somehow what it meant, and what it would
mean for me.

***


Catharina was sitting on the bench when I got back, feeding Johannes.
I showed her the joint and she nodded. As I was about to go in she
said in a low voice, "My husband has inspected the studio and found
the cleaning suited him." She did not look at me.

"Thank you, madam." I stepped inside, glanced at a still life of
fruits and a lobster, and thought, So, I really am to stay.

The rest of the day passed much as the first had, and as the days to
follow would. Once I had cleaned the studio and gone to the fish
stalls or the Meat Hall I began again on the laundry, one day sorting,
soaking and working on stains, another day scrubbing, rinsing, boiling
and wringing before hanging things to dry and be bleached in the noon
sun, another day ironing and mending and folding. At some point I
always stopped to help Tanneke with the midday meal. Afterwards we
cleaned up, and then I had a little time free to rest and sew on the
bench out front, or back in the courtyard. After that I finished
whatever I had been doing in the morning, then helped Tanneke with the
late meal. The last thing we did was to mop the floors once more so
that they would be fresh and clean for the morning.

***



At night I covered the Crucifixion hanging at the foot of my bed with
the apron I had worn that day. I slept better then. The next day I
added the apron to the day's wash.

***


While Catharina was unlocking the studio door on the second morning I
asked her if I should clean the windows.

"Why not?" she answered sharply. "You do not need to ask me such petty
things."

"Because of the light, madam," I explained. "It might change the
painting if I clean them. You see?"

She did not see. She would not or could not come into the room to look
at the painting. It seemed she never entered the studio. When Tanneke
was in the right mood I would have to ask her why. Catharina went
downstairs to ask him and called up to me to leave the windows.

When I cleaned the studio I saw nothing to indicate that he had been
there at all. Nothing had been moved, the palettes were clean, the
painting itself appeared no different. But I could feel that he had
been there.

I had seen very little of him the first two days I was in the house on
the Oude Langendijck. I heard him sometimes, on the stairs, in the
hallway, chuckling with his children, talking softly to Catharina.
Hearing his voice made me feel as if I were walking along the edge of
a canal and unsure of my steps. I did not know how he would treat me
in his own house, whether or not he would pay attention to the
vegetables I chopped in his kitchen.

No gentleman had ever taken such an interest in me before.

I came face to face with him my third day in the house. Just before
dinner I went to find a plate that Lisbeth had left outside and almost
ran into him as he carried Aleydis in his arms down the hallway.

I stepped back. He and Aleydis regarded me with the same grey eyes. He
neither smiled nor did not smile at me. It was hard to meet his eyes.
I thought of the woman looking at herself in the painting upstairs, of
wearing pearls and yellow satin. She would have no trouble meeting the
gaze of a gentleman.  When I managed to lift my eyes to his he was no
longer looking at me.

The next day I saw the woman herself. On my way back from the butcher
a man and woman walked ahead of me on the Oude Langendijck. At our
door he turned to her and bowed, then walked on. There was a long
white feather in his hat--he must have been the visitor from a few days
earlier. From the brief glimpse I caught of his profile I saw that he
had a moustache, and a plump face to match his body. He smiled as if
he were about to pay a flattering but false compliment. The woman
turned into the house before I could see her face but I did see the
five-pointed red ribbon in her hair. I held back, waiting by the
doorway until I heard her go up the stairs.

Later I was putting away some clothes in the cupboard in the great
hall when she came back down. I stood up as she entered. She was
carrying the yellow mantle in her arms. The ribbon was still in her
hair.

"Oh!" she said. "Where is Catharina?"

"She's gone with her mother to the Town Hall, madam. Family business."

"I see. Never mind, I'll see her another day. I'll leave this here for
her." She draped the mantle across the bed and dropped the pearl
necklace on top of it.

"Yes, madam."

I could not take my eyes off her. I felt as if I were seeing her and
yet not seeing her. It was a strange sensation. She was, as Maria
Thins had said, not as beautiful as when the light struck her in the
painting. Yet she was beautiful, if only because I was remembering her
so. She gazed at me with a puzzled look on her face, as if she ought
to know me since I was staring at her with such familiarity. I managed
to lower my eyes. "I will tell her you called, madam."

She nodded but looked troubled. She glanced at the pearls she had laid
on top of the mantle. "I think I shall leave these up in the studio
with him," she announced, picking up the necklace. She did not look at
me, but I knew she was thinking that maids were not to be trusted with
pearls. After she had gone her face lingered like perfume.

***


On Saturday Catharina and Maria Thins took Tanneke and Maertge with
them to the market in the square, where they would buy vegetables to
last the week, staples and other things for the house. I longed to go
with them, thinking I might see my mother and sister, but I was told
to stay at the house with the


younger girls and the baby. It was difficult to keep them from running
off to the market. I would have taken them there myself but I did not
dare leave the house unattended. Instead we watched the boats go up
and down the canal, full on their way to the market with cabbages,
pigs, flowers, wood, flour, strawberries, horseshoes. They were empty
on the way back, the boatmen counting money or drinking. I taught the
girls games I had played with Agnes and Frans, and they taught me
games they had made up. They blew bubbles, played with their dolls,
ran with their hoops while I sat on the bench with Johannes in my lap.

Cornelia seemed to have forgotten about the slap. She was cheerful and
friendly, helpful with Johannes, obedient to me. "Will you help me?"
she asked me as she tried to climb onto a barrel the neighbors had
left out in the street. Her light brown eyes were wide and innocent. I
found myself warming to her sweetness, yet knowing I could not trust
her. She could be the most interesting of the girls, but also the most
changeable--the best and the worst at the same time.

They were sorting through a collection of shells they had brought
outside, dividing them into piles of different colors, when he came
out of the house. I squeezed the baby round his middle, feeling his
ribs under my hands. He squealed and I buried my nose in his ear to
hide my face.

"Papa, can I go with you?" Cornelia cried, jumping up and grabbing his
hand.  I could not see the expression on his face--the tilt of his head
and the brim of his hat hid it.

Lisbeth and Aleydis abandoned their shells. "I want to go too!" they
shouted in unison, grabbing his other hand.

He shook his head and then I could see his bemused expression. "Not
today-- I'm going to the apothecary's."

"Will you buy paint things, Papa?" Cornelia asked, still holding on to
his hand.

"Among other things."

Baby Johannes began to cry and he glanced down at me. I bounced the
baby, feeling awkward.

He looked as if he would say something, but instead he shook off the
girls and strode down the Oude Langendijck.


He had not said a word to me since we discussed the color and shape of
vegetables.

***


I woke very early on Sunday, for I was excited to go home. I had to
wait for Catharina to unlock the front door, but when I heard it swing
open I came out to find Maria Thins with the key.

"My daughter is tired today," she said as she stood aside to let me
out. "She will rest for a few days. Can you manage without her?"

"Of course, madam," I replied, then added, "and I may always ask you
if I have questions."

Maria Thins chuckled. "Ah, you're a cunning one, girl. You know whose
pot to spoon from. Never mind, we can do with a bit of cleverness
around here." She handed me some coins, my wages for the days I had
worked. "Off you go now, to tell your mother all about us, I suspect."

I slipped away before she could say more, crossed Market Square, past
those going to early services at the New Church, and hurried up the
streets and canals that led me home. When I turned into my street I
thought how different it felt already after less than a week away. The
light seemed brighter and flatter, the canal wider. The plane trees
lining the canal stood perfectly still, like sentries waiting for me.

Agnes was sitting on the bench in front of the house. When she saw me
she called inside, "She's here!" then ran to me and took my arm. "How
is it?" she asked, not even saying hello. "Are they nice? Do you work
hard? Are there any girls there? Is the house very grand? Where do you
sleep? Do you eat off fine plates?"

I laughed and would not answer any of her questions until I had hugged
my mother and greeted my father. Although it was not very much, I felt
proud to hand over to my mother the few coins in my hand. This was,
after all, why I was working.

My father came to sit outside with us and hear about my new life. I
gave my hands to him to guide him over the front stoop. As he sat down
on the bench he rubbed my palms with his thumb. "Your hands are
chapped," he said. "So rough and worn. Already you have the scars of
hard work."


"Don't worry," I answered lightly. "There was so much laundry waiting
for me because they didn't have enough help before. It will get easier
soon."

My mother studied my hands. "I'll soak some bergamot in oil," she
said. "That will keep your hands soft. Agnes and I will go into the
country to pick some."

"Tell us!" Agnes cried. "Tell us about them."

I told them. Only a few things I didn't mention--how tired I was at
night; how the Crucifixion scene hung at the foot of my bed; how I had
slapped Cornelia; how Maertge and Agnes were the same age. Otherwise I
told them everything.

I passed on the message from our butcher to my mother. "That is kind
of him," she said, "but he knows we have no money for meat and will
not take such charity."

"I don't think he meant it as charity," I explained. "I think he meant
it out of friendship."

She did not answer, but I knew she would not go back to the butcher.

When I mentioned the new butchers, Pieter the father and son, she
raised her eyebrows but said nothing.

Afterwards we went to services at our church, where I was surrounded
by familiar faces and familiar words. Sitting between Agnes and my
mother, I felt my back relaxing into the pew, and my face softening
from the mask I had worn all week. I thought I might cry.

Mother and Agnes would not let me help them with dinner when we came
back home. I sat with my father on the bench in the sun. He held his
face up to the warmth and kept his head cocked that way all the time
we talked.

"Now, Griet," he said, "tell me about your new master. You hardly said
a word about him."

"I haven't seen much of him," I replied truthfully. "He is either in
his studio, where no one is to disturb him, or he is out."

"Taking care of Guild business, I expect. But you have been in his
studio-- you told us about the cleaning and the measurements, but
nothing about the painting he is working on. Describe it to me."

"I don't know if I can in such a way that you will be able to see it."

"Try. I have little to think of now except for memories. It will give
me pleasure to imagine a painting by a master, even if my mind creates
only a poor imitation."

So I tried to describe the woman tying pearls around her neck, her
hands suspended, gazing at herself in the mirror, the light from the
window bathing her face and her yellow mantle, the dark foreground
that separated her from us.

My father listened intently, but his own face was not illuminated
until I said, "The light on the back wall is so warm that looking at
it feels the way the sun feels on your face."

He nodded and smiled, pleased now that he understood.

"This is what you like best about your new life," he said presently.
"Being in the studio."

The only thing, I thought, but did not say.

When we ate dinner I tried not to compare it with that in the house at
Papists' Corner, but already I had become accustomed to meat and good
rye bread.  Although my mother was a better cook than Tanneke, the
brown bread was dry, the vegetable stew tasteless with no fat to
flavor it. The room, too, was different--no marble tiles, no thick silk
curtains, no tooled leather chairs.  Everything was simple and clean,
without ornamentation. I loved it because I knew it, but I was aware
now of its dullness.

At the end of the day it was hard saying good-bye to my parents--harder
than when I had first left, because this time I knew what I was going
back to. Agnes walked with me as far as Market Square. When we were
alone, I asked her how she was.

"Lonely," she replied, a sad word from a young girl. She had been
lively all day but had now grown subdued.

"I'll come every Sunday," I promised. "And perhaps during the week I
can come quickly to say hello after I've gone for the meat or fish."

***


"Or I can come to see you when you are out buying things," she
suggested, brightening.

We did manage to meet in the Meat Hall several times. I was always
glad to see her--as long as I was alone.

***


I began to find my place at the house on the Oude Langendijck.
Catharina, Tanneke and Cornelia were all difficult at times, but
usually I was left alone to my work. This may have been Maria Thins'
influence. She had decided, for her own reasons, that I was a useful
addition, and the others, even the children, followed her example.

Perhaps she felt the clothes were cleaner and better bleached now that
I had taken on the laundry. Or that the meat was more tender now that
I chose it. Or that he was happier with a clean studio. These first
two things were true. The last, I did not know. When he and I finally
spoke it was not about my cleaning.

I was careful to deflect any praise for better housekeeping from
myself. I did not want to make enemies. If Maria Thins liked the meat,
I suggested it was Tanneke's cooking that made it so. If Maertge said
her apron was whiter than before, I said it was because the summer sun
was particularly strong now.

I avoided Catharina when I could. It had been clear from the moment
she'd seen me chopping vegetables in my mother's kitchen that she
disliked me. Her mood was not improved by the baby she carried, which
made her ungainly and nothing like the graceful lady of the house she
felt herself to be. It was a hot summer too, and the baby was
especially active. It began to kick whenever she walked, or so she
said. As she grew bigger she went about the house with a tired, pained
look. She took to staying in bed later and later, so that Maria Thins
took over her keys and unlocked the studio door for me in the morning.
Tanneke and I began to do more and more of her work--looking after the
girls, buying things for the house, changing the baby.

One day when Tanneke was in a good mood, I asked her why they did not
take on more servants to make things easier. "With a big house like
this, and your mistress's wealth, and the master's paintings," I
added, "could they not afford another maid? Or a cook?"

"Huh," Tanneke snorted. "They can barely manage to pay you."



I was surprised--the coins amounted to so little in my hand each week.
It would take me years of work to be able to buy something as fine as
the yellow mantle that Catharina kept so carelessly folded in her
cupboard. It did not seem possible that they could be short of money.

"Of course they'll find a way to pay for a nurse for a few months when
the baby comes," Tanneke added. She sounded disapproving.

"Why?"

"So she can feed the baby."

"The mistress won't feed her own baby?" I asked stupidly.

"She couldn't have so many children if she fed her own. It stops you
having them, you know, if you feed your own."

"Oh." I felt very ignorant of such things. "Does she want more
children?"

Tanneke chuckled. "Sometimes I think she's filling the house with
children because she can't fill it with servants as she'd like." She
lowered her voice.  "The master doesn't paint enough to make the money
for servants, you see.  Three paintings a year he does, usually.
Sometimes only two. You don't get rich from that."

"Can he not paint faster?" I knew even as I said it that he would not.
He would always paint at his own pace.

"Mistress and young mistress disagree sometimes. Young mistress wants
him to paint more, but my mistress says speed would ruin him."

"Maria Thins is very wise." I had learned that I could voice opinions
in front of Tanneke as long as Maria Thins was in some way praised.
Tanneke was fiercely loyal to her mistress. She had little patience
with Catharina, however, and when she was in the right mood she
advised me on how to handle her.  "Take no notice of what she says,"
she counseled. "Keep your face empty when she speaks, then do things
your own way, or how my mistress or I tell you to do them. She never
checks, she never notices. She just orders us about because she feels
she has to. But we know who our real mistress is, and so does she."

***


Although Tanneke was often bad tempered with me, I learned not to take
it to heart, as she never remained so for long. She was fickle in her
moods, perhaps from being caught between Catharina and Maria Thins for
so many years.  Despite her confident words about ignoring what
Catharina said, Tanneke did not follow her own advice. Catharina's
harsh tone upset her. And Maria Thins, for all her fairness, did not
defend Tanneke from Catharina. I never once heard Maria Thins berate
her daughter for anything, though Catharina needed it at times.

There was also the matter of Tanneke's housekeeping. Perhaps her
loyalty made up for her sloppiness about the house--corners unmopped,
meat burned on the outside and raw on the inside, pots not scrubbed
thoroughly. I could not imagine what she had done to his studio when
she tried to clean it. Though Maria Thins rarely scolded Tanneke, they
both knew she ought to, and this kept Tanneke uncertain and quick to
defend herself.

It became clear to me that in spite of her shrewd ways, Maria Thins
was soft on the people closest to her. Her judgment was not as sound
as it appeared.

Of the four girls, Cornelia was, as she had shown the first morning,
the most unpredictable. Both Lisbeth and Aleydis were good, quiet
girls, and Maertge was old enough to begin learning the ways of the
house, which steadied her-- though occasionally she would have a fit of
temper and shout at me much like her mother. Cornelia did not shout,
but she was at times ungovernable. Even the threat of Maria Thins'
anger that I had used on the first day did not always work. She could
be funny and playful one moment, then turn the next, like a purring
cat who bites the hand stroking it. While loyal to her sisters, she
did not hesitate to make them cry by pinching them hard. I was wary of
Cornelia, and could not be fond of her in the way I came to be of the
others.

I escaped from them all when I cleaned the studio. Maria Thins
unlocked the door for me and sometimes stayed a few minutes to check
on the painting, as if it were a sick child she was nursing. Once she
left, though, I had the room to myself. I looked around to see if
anything had changed. At first it seemed to remain the same, day after
day, but after my eyes grew accustomed to the details of the room I
began to notice small things--the brushes rearranged on the top of the
cupboard, one of the cupboard's drawers left ajar, the palette knife
balanced on the easel's ledge, a chair moved a little from its place
by the door.

Nothing, however, changed in the corner he was painting. I was careful
not to displace any of it, quickly adjusting to my way of measuring so
that I was able to clean that area almost as quickly and confidently
as the rest of the room.  And after experimenting on other bits of
cloth, I began to clean the dark blue

cloth and yellow curtain with a damp rag, pressing it carefully so
that it picked up dust without disturbing the folds.

There seemed to be no changes to the painting, as hard as I looked for
them.  At last one day I discovered that another pearl had been added
to the woman's necklace. Another day the shadow of the yellow curtain
had grown bigger. I thought too that some of the fingers on her right
hand had been moved.

The satin mantle began to look so real I wanted to reach out and touch
it.

I had almost touched the real one the day van Ruijven's wife left it
on the bed.  I had just been reaching over to stroke the fur collar
when I had looked up to see Cornelia in the doorway, watching me. One
of the other girls would have asked me what I was doing, but Cornelia
had just watched. That was worse than any questions. I had dropped my
hand and she'd smiled.

***


Maertge insisted on coming with me to the fish stalls one morning
several weeks after I had begun working at the house. She loved to run
through Market Square, looking at things, petting the horses, joining
other children in their games, sampling smoked fish from various
stalls. She poked me in the ribs as I was buying herring and shouted,
"Look, Griet, look at that kite!"

The kite above our heads was shaped like a fish with a long tail, the
wind making it look as if it were swimming through the air, with
seagulls wheeling around it. As I smiled I saw Agnes hovering near us,
her eyes fixed on Maertge. I still had not told Agnes there was a girl
her age in the house--I thought it might upset her, that she would feel
she was being replaced.

Sometimes when I visited my family at home I felt awkward telling them
anything. My new life was taking over the old.

When Agnes looked at me I shook my head slightly so that Maertge would
not see, and turned away to put the fish in my pail. I took my time--I
could not bear to see the hurt look on her face. I did not know what
Maertge would do if Agnes spoke to me.

When I turned around Agnes had gone.

I shall have to explain to her when I see her Sunday, I thought. I
have two families now, and they must not mix.

I was always ashamed afterwards that I had turned my back on my own
sister.

***


I was hanging out washing in the courtyard, shaking out each piece
before hanging it taut from the line, when Catharina appeared,
breathing heavily. She sat down on a chair by the door, closed her
eyes and sighed. I continued what I was doing as if it were natural
for her to sit with me, but my jaw tightened.

"Are they gone yet?" she asked suddenly.

"Who, madam?"

"Them, you silly girl. My husband and-- Go and see if they've gone
upstairs yet."

I stepped cautiously into the hallway. Two sets of feet were climbing
the stairs.

"Can you manage it?" I heard him say.

"Yes, yes, of course. You know it's not very heavy," another man
replied, in a voice deep like a well. "Just a bit cumbersome."

They reached the top of the stairs and entered the studio. I heard the
door close.

"Have they gone?" Catharina hissed.

"They are in the studio, madam," I responded.

"Good. Now help me up." Catharina held out her hands and I pulled her
to her feet. I did not think she could grow much bigger and still
manage to walk. She moved down the hallway like a ship with its sails
full, holding on to her bunch of keys so that they wouldn't clink, and
disappeared into the great hall.

Later I asked Tanneke why Catharina had been hiding.

"Oh, van Leeuwenhoek was here," she answered, chuckling. "A friend of
the master's. She's afraid of him."



"Why?"

Tanneke laughed harder. "She broke his box! She was looking in it and
knocked it over. You know how clumsy she is."

I thought of my mother's knife spinning across the floor. "What box?"

"He has a wooden box that you look in and--see things."

"What things?"

"All sorts of things!" Tanneke replied impatiently. She clearly did
not want to talk about the box. "Young mistress broke it, and van
Leeuwenhoek won't see her now. That's why master won't allow her in
his room unless he's there.  Perhaps he thinks she'll knock over a
painting!"

I discovered what the box was the next morning, the day he spoke to me
about things that took me many months to understand.

When I arrived to clean the studio, the easel and chair had been moved
to one side. The desk was in their place, cleared of papers and
prints. On it sat a wooden box about the size of a chest for storing
clothes in. A smaller box was attached to one side, with a round
object protruding from it.

I did not understand what it was, but I did not dare touch it. I went
about my cleaning, glancing over at it now and then as if its use
would suddenly become clear to me. I cleaned the corner, then the rest
of the room, dusting the box so that I hardly touched it with my
cloth. I cleaned the storeroom and mopped the floor. When I was done I
stood in front of the box, arms crossed, moving around to study it.

My back was to the door but I knew suddenly that he was standing
there. I wasn't sure whether to turn around or wait for him to speak.

He must have made the door creak, for then I was able to turn and face
him.  He was leaning against the threshold, wearing a long black robe
over his daily clothes. He was watching me curiously, but he did not
seem anxious that I might damage his box.

"Do you want to look in it?" he asked. It was the first time he had
spoken directly to me since he asked about the vegetables many weeks
before.



"Yes, sir. I do," I replied without knowing what I was agreeing to.
"What is it?"

"It is called a camera obscura."

The words meant nothing to me. I stood aside and watched him unhook a
catch and lift up part of the box's top, which had been divided in two
and hinged together. He propped up the lid at an angle so that the box
was partly open. There was a bit of glass underneath. He leaned over
and peered into the space between the lid and box, then touched the
round piece at the end of the smaller box. He seemed to be looking at
something, though I didn't think there could be much in the box to
take such interest in.

He stood up and gazed at the corner I had cleaned so carefully, then
reached over and closed the middle window's shutters, so that the room
was lit only by the window in the corner.

Then he took off his robe.

I shifted uneasily from one foot to the other.

He removed his hat, placing it on the chair by the easel, and pulled
the robe over his head as he leaned over the box again.

I took a step back and glanced at the doorway behind me. Catharina had
little will to climb the stairs these days, but I wondered what Maria
Thins, or Cornelia, or anyone would think if they saw us. When I
turned back I kept my eyes fixed on his shoes, which were gleaming
from the polish I had given them the day before.

He stood up at last and pulled the robe from his head, his hair
ruffled. "There, Griet, it is ready. Now you look." He stepped away
from the box and gestured me towards it. I stood rooted to my place.

"Sir--"

"Place the robe over your head as I did. Then the image will be
stronger. And look at it from this angle so it will not be upside
down."

I did not know what to do. The thought of me covered with his robe,
unable to see, and him looking at me all the while, made me feel
faint.



But he was my master. I was meant to do as he said.

I pressed my lips together, then stepped up to the box, to the end
where the lid had been lifted. I bent over and looked in at the square
of milky glass fixed inside. There was a faint drawing of something on
it.

He draped his robe gently over my head so that it blocked out all
light. It was still warm from him, and smelled of the way brick feels
when it has been baked by the sun. I placed my hands on the table to
steady myself and closed my eyes for a moment. I felt as if I had
drunk my evening beer too quickly.

"What do you see?" I heard him say.

I opened my eyes and saw the painting, without the woman in it.

"Oh!" I stood up so suddenly that the robe dropped from my head to the
floor.  I stepped back from the box, treading on the cloth.

I moved my foot. "I'm sorry, sir. I will wash the robe this morning."

"Never mind about the robe, Griet. What did you see?"

I swallowed. I was terribly confused, and a little frightened. What
was in the box was a trick of the devil, or something Catholic I did
not understand. "I saw the painting, sir. Except that the woman wasn't
in it, and it was smaller. And things were--switched around."

"Yes, the image is projected upside down, and left and right are
reversed.  There are mirrors that can fix that."

I did not understand what he was saying.

"But--"

"What is it?"

"I don't understand, sir. How did it get there?"

He picked up the robe and brushed it off. He was smiling. When he
smiled his face was like an open window.



"Do you see this?" He pointed to the round object at the end of the
smaller box. "This is called a lens. It is made of a piece of glass
cut in a certain way.  When light from that scene"--he pointed to the
corner--"goes through it and into the box it projects the image so that
we can see it here." He tapped the cloudy glass.

I was staring at him so hard, trying to understand, that my eyes began
to water.

"What is an image, sir? It is not a word I know."

Something changed in his face, as if he had been looking over my
shoulder but now was looking at me. "It is a picture, like a
painting."

I nodded. More than anything I wanted him to think I could follow what
he said.

"Your eyes are very wide," he said then.

I blushed. "So I have been told, sir."

"Do you want to look again?"

I did not, but I knew I could not say so. I thought for a moment. "I
will look again, sir, but only if I am left alone."

He looked surprised, then amused. "All right," he said. He handed me
his robe.  "I'll return in a few minutes, and tap on the door before I
enter."

He left, closing the door behind him. I grasped his robe, my hands
shaking.

For a moment I thought of simply pretending to look, and saying that I
had.  But he would know I was lying.

And I was curious. It became easier to consider it without him
watching me. I took a deep breath and gazed down into the box. I could
see on the glass a faint trace of the scene in the corner. As I
brought the robe over my head the image, as he called it, became
clearer and clearer--the table, the chairs, the yellow curtain in the
corner, the back wall with the map hanging on it, the ceramic pot
gleaming on the table, the pewter basin, the powder-brush, the letter.
They were all there, assembled before my eyes on a flat surface, a
painting that was not a painting. I cautiously touched the glass--it
was smooth and cold, with no traces of paint on it. I removed the robe
and the image went

faint again, though it was still there. I put the robe over me once
more, closing out the light, and watched the jeweled colors appear
again. They seemed to be even brighter and more colorful on the glass
than they were in the corner.

It became as hard to stop looking into the box as it had been to take
my eyes from the painting of the woman with the pearl necklace the
first time I'd seen it. When I heard the tap on the door I just had
time to straighten up and let the robe drop to my shoulders before he
walked in.

"Have you looked again, Griet? Have you looked properly?"

"I have looked, sir, but I am not at all sure of what I have seen." I
smoothed my cap.

"It is surprising, isn't it? I was as amazed as you the first time my
friend showed it to me."

"But why do you look at it, sir, when you can look at your own
painting?"

"You do not understand." He tapped the box. "This is a tool. I use it
to help me see, so that I am able to make the painting."

"But--you use your eyes to see."

"True, but my eyes do not always see everything."

My eyes darted to the corner, as if they would discover something
unexpected that had been hidden from me before, behind the
powder-brush, emerging from the shadows of the blue cloth.

"Tell me, Griet," he continued, "do you think I simply paint what is
there in that corner?"

I glanced at the painting, unable to answer. I felt as if I were being
tricked.  Whatever I answered would be wrong.

"The camera obscura helps me to see in a different way," he explained.
"To see more of what is there."

When he saw the baffled expression on my face he must have regretted
saying so much to someone like me. He turned and snapped the box shut.
I slipped off his robe and held it out to him.

"Sir--"

"Thank you, Griet," he said as he took it from me. "Have you finished
with the cleaning here?"

"Yes, sir."

"You may go, then."

"Thank you, sir." I quickly gathered my cleaning things and left, the
door clicking shut behind me.

***


I thought about what he had said, about how the box helped him to see
more.  Although I did not understand why, I knew he was right because
I could see it in his painting of the woman, and also what I
remembered of the painting of Delft. He saw things in a way that
others did not, so that a city I had lived in all my life seemed a
different place, so that a woman became beautiful with the light on
her face.

The day after I looked in the box I went to the studio and it was
gone. The easel was back in its place. I glanced at the painting.
Previously I had found only tiny changes in it. Now there was one
easily seen--the map hanging on the wall behind the woman had been
removed from both the painting and the scene itself. The wall was now
bare. The painting looked the better for it-- simpler, the lines of the
woman clearer now against the brownish-white background of the wall.
But the change upset me--it was so sudden. I would not have expected it
of him.

I felt uneasy after I left the studio, and as I walked to the Meat
Hall I did not look about me as I usually did. Though I waved hello to
the old butcher I did not stop, even when he called out to me.

Pieter the son was minding the stall alone. I had seen him a few times
since that first day, but always in the presence of his father,
standing in the background while Pieter the father took charge. Now he
said, "Hello, Griet.  I've wondered when you would come."

I thought that a silly thing to say, as I had been buying meat at the
same time each day.



His eyes did not meet mine.

I decided not to remark on his words. "Three pounds of stewing beef,
please.  And do you have more of those sausages your father sold me
the other day?  The girls liked them."

"There are none left, I'm afraid."

A woman came to stand behind me, waiting her turn. Pieter the son
glanced at her. "Can you wait for a moment?" he said to me in a low
voice.

"Wait?"

"I want to ask you something."

I stood aside so that he could serve the woman. I did not like doing
so when I was feeling so unsettled, but I had little choice.

When he was done and we were alone again he asked, "Where does your
family live?"

"The Oude Langendijck, at Papists' Corner."

"No, no, your family."

I flushed at my mistake. "Off the Rietveld Canal, not far from the Koe
Gate.  Why do you ask?"

His eyes fully met mine at last. "There have been reports of the
plague in that quarter."

I took a step back, my eyes widening. "Has a quarantine been set?"

"Not yet. They expect to today."

Afterwards I realized he must have been asking others about me. If he
hadn't already known where my family lived, he would never have known
to tell me about the plague.

***



I do not remember getting back from there. Pieter the son must have
placed the meat in my pail but all I knew was that I arrived at the
house, dropped the pail at Tanneke's feet and said, "I must see the
mistress."

Tanneke rummaged through the pail. "No sausages, and nothing to take
their place! What's the matter with you? Go straight back to the Meat
Hall."

"I must see the mistress," I repeated.

"What is it?" Tanneke grew suspicious. "Have you done something
wrong?"

"My family may be quarantined. I must go to them."

"Oh." Tanneke shifted uncertainly. "I wouldn't know about that. You'll
have to ask. She's in with my mistress."

Catharina and Maria Thins were in the Crucifixion room. Maria Thins
was smoking her pipe. They stopped talking when I entered.

"What is it, girl?" Maria Thins grunted.

"Please, madam," I addressed Catharina, "I have heard that my family's
street may be quarantined. I would like to go and see them."

"What, and bring the plague back with you?" she snapped. "Certainly
not. Are you mad?"

I looked at Maria Thins, which made Catharina angrier. "I have said
no," she announced. "It is I who decide what you can and cannot do.
Have you forgotten that?"

"No, madam." I lowered my eyes.

"You won't be going home Sundays until it's safe. Now go, we have
things to discuss without you hanging about."

I took the washing to the courtyard and sat outside with my back to
the door so that I would not have to see anyone. I wept as I scrubbed
one of Maertge's dresses. When I smelled Maria Thins' pipe I wiped my
eyes but did not turn round.



"Don't be silly, girl," Maria Thins said quietly to my back. "You
can't do anything for them and you have to save yourself. You're a
clever girl, you can work that out."

I did not answer. After a while I could no longer smell her pipe.

The next morning he came in while I was sweeping the studio.

"Griet, I am sorry to hear of your family's misfortune," he said.

I looked up from my broom. There was kindness in his eyes, and I felt
I could ask him. "Will you tell me, sir, if the quarantine has been
set?"

"It was, yesterday morning."

"Thank you for telling me, sir."

He nodded, and was about to leave when I said, "May I ask you
something else, sir? About the painting."

He stopped in the doorway. "What is it?"

"When you looked in the box, did it tell you to remove the map from
the painting?"

"Yes, it did." His face became intent like a stork's when it sees a
fish it can catch. "Does it please you that the map is gone?"

"It is a better painting now." I did not think I would have dared to
say such a thing at another time, but the danger to my family had made
me reckless.

His smile made me grip my broom tightly.

***


I was not able to work well then. I was worried about my family, not
about how clean I could get the floors or how white the sheets. No one
may have remarked on my good housekeeping before, but everyone noticed
how careless I was now. Lisbeth complained of a spotted apron. Tanneke
grumbled that my sweeping caused dust to settle on the dishes.
Catharina shouted at me several



times--for forgetting to iron the sleeves of her chemise, for buying
cod when I was meant to get herring, for letting the fire go out.

Maria Thins muttered, "Steady yourself, girl," as she passed me in the
hallway.

Only in the studio was I able to clean as I had before, maintaining
the precision he needed.

I did not know what to do that first Sunday I was not allowed to go
home. I could not go to our church either, as it was in the
quarantined area as well. I did not want to remain at the house,
though--whatever Catholics did on Sundays, I did not want to be among
them.

They left together to go to the Jesuit church around the corner in the
Molenpoort, the girls wearing good dresses, even Tanneke changed into
a yellowish brown wool dress, and carrying Johannes. Catharina walked
slowly, holding on to her husband's arm. Maria Thins locked the door
behind her. I stood on the tiles in front of the house as they
disappeared and considered what to do. The bells in the New Church
tower in front of me began to sound the hour.

I was baptized there, I thought. Surely they will allow me inside for
the service.

I crept into the vast place, feeling like a mouse hiding in a rich
man's house. It was cool and dim inside, the smooth round pillars
reaching up, the ceiling so high above me it could almost be the sky.
Behind the minister's altar was the grand marble tomb of William of
Orange.

I saw no one I knew, only people dressed in sober clothes much finer
in their cloth and cut than any I would ever wear. I hid behind a
pillar for the service, which I could hardly listen to, I was so
nervous that someone would come along and ask me what I was doing
there. At the end of the service I slipped out quickly before anyone
approached me. I walked round the church and looked across the canal
at the house. The door was still shut and locked.  Catholic services
must last longer than ours, I thought.

I walked as far as I could towards my family's house, stopping only
where a barrier manned by a soldier blocked the way. The streets
looked very quiet beyond it.

"How is it," I asked the soldier, "back there?"

He shrugged and did not reply. He looked hot in his cloak and hat, for
though the sun was not out the air was warm and close.

"Is there a list? Of those who have died?" I could barely say the
words.

"Not yet."

I was not surprised--the lists were always delayed, and usually
incomplete.  Word of mouth was often more accurate. "Do you know--have
you heard if Jan the tiler--"

"I know nothing of anyone in there. You'll have to wait." The soldier
turned away as others approached him with similar queries.

I tried to speak to another soldier on a barrier at a different
street. Though friendlier, he too could tell me nothing about my
family. "I could ask around, but not for nothing," he added, smiling
and looking me up and down so I would know he didn't mean money.

"Shame on you," I snapped, "for seeking to take advantage of those in
misery."

But he did not seem ashamed. I had forgotten that soldiers think of
just one thing when they see a young woman.

When I got back to the Oude Langendijck I was relieved to find the
house open. I slipped inside and spent the afternoon hiding in the
courtyard with my prayer book. In the evening I crept into bed without
eating, telling Tanneke my stomach hurt.

***


At the butcher's Pieter the son pulled me to one side while his father
was busy with someone else. "Have you had news of your family?"

I shook my head. "No one could tell me anything." I did not meet his
gaze. His concern made me feel as if I had just stepped off a boat and
the ground was wobbling under my feet.

"I will find out for you," Pieter stated. From his tone it was clear
that I was not to argue with him.


"Thank you," I said after a long pause. I wondered what I would do if
he did find out something. He was not demanding anything the way the
soldier had, but I would be obliged to him. I did not want to be
obliged to anyone.

"It may take a few days," Pieter murmured before he turned to hand his
father a cow's liver. He wiped his hands on his apron. I nodded, my
eyes on his hands. The creases between his nails and his fingers were
filled with blood.

I expect I will have to get used to that sight, I thought.

I began to look forward to my daily errand even more than to cleaning
the studio. I dreaded it too, though, especially the moment Pieter the
son looked up from his work and saw me, and I searched his eyes for
clues. I wanted to know, yet as long as I didn't, it was possible to
hope.

Several days passed when I bought meat from him, or passed by his
stall after I had bought fish, and he simply shook his head. Then one
day he looked up and looked away, and I knew what he would say. I just
did not know who.

I had to wait until he finished with several customers. I felt so sick
I wanted to sit down, but the floor was speckled with blood.

At last Pieter the son took off his apron and came over. "It is your
sister, Agnes," he said softly. "She is very ill."

"And my parents?"

"They stay well, so far."

I did not ask what risk he had gone to in order to find out for me.
"Thank you, Pieter," I whispered. It was the first time I had spoken
his name.

I looked into his eyes and saw kindness there. I also saw what I had
feared-- expectation.

***


On Sunday I decided to visit my brother. I did not know how much he
knew of the quarantine or of Agnes. I left the house early and walked
to his factory, which was outside the city walls not far from the
Rotterdam Gate. Frans was still asleep when I arrived. The woman who
answered at the gate laughed


when I asked for him. "He'll be asleep for hours yet," she said. "They
sleep all day on Sundays, the apprentices. It's their day off."

I did not like her tone, nor what she said. "Please wake him and tell
him his sister is here," I demanded. I sounded a bit like Catharina.

The woman raised her eyebrows. "I didn't know Frans came from a family
so high on their throne you can see up their noses." She disappeared
and I wondered if she would bother to wake Frans. I sat on a low wall
to wait. A family passed me on their way to church. The children, two
girls and two boys, ran ahead of their parents, just as we had ours. I
watched them until they passed from sight.

Frans appeared at last, rubbing sleep from his face. "Oh, Griet," he
said. "I didn't know if it would be you or Agnes. I suppose Agnes
wouldn't come so far on her own."

He didn't know. I couldn't keep it from him, not even to tell him
gently.

"Agnes has been struck by the plague," I blurted out. "God help her
and our parents."

Frans stopped rubbing his face. His eyes were red.

"Agnes?" he repeated in confusion. "How do you know this?"

"Someone found out for me."

"You haven't seen them?"

"There is a quarantine."

"A quarantine? How long has there been one?"

"Ten days so far."

Frans shook his head angrily. "I heard nothing of this! Stuck in this
factory day after day, nothing but white tiles as far as I can see. I
think I may go mad."

"It's Agnes you should be thinking of now."



Frans hung his head unhappily. He had grown taller since I'd seen him
months before. His voice had deepened as well.

"Frans, have you been going to church?"

He shrugged. I could not bring myself to question him further.

"I'm going now to pray for them all," I said instead. "Will you come
with me?"

He did not want to, but I managed to persuade him--I did not want to
face a strange church alone again. We found one not far away, and
although the service did not comfort me, I prayed hard for our family.

Afterwards Frans and I walked along the Schie River. We said little,
but we each knew what the other was thinking--neither of us had heard
of anyone recovering from the plague.

***


One morning when Maria Thins was unlocking the studio for me she said,
"All right, girl. Clear that corner today." She pointed to the area
that he was painting. I did not understand what she meant. "All the
things on the table should go into the chests in the storeroom," she
continued, "except the bowl and Catharina's powder-brush. I'll take
them with me." She crossed to the table and picked up two of the
objects I had spent so many weeks setting carefully in their places.

When she saw my face Maria Thins laughed. "Don't worry. He's finished.
He doesn't need this now. When you're done here make sure you dust all
the chairs and set them out by the middle window. And open all the
shutters." She left, cradling the pewter bowl in her arms.

Without the bowl and brush the tabletop was transformed into a picture
I did not recognize. The letter, the cloth, the ceramic pot lay
without meaning, as if someone had simply dropped them onto the table.
Still, I could not imagine moving them.

I put off doing so by going about my other duties. I opened all the
shutters, which made the room very bright and strange, then dusted and
mopped everywhere but the table. I looked at the painting for some
time, trying to



discover what was different about it that now made it complete. I had
seen no changes in it over the past several days.

I was still pondering when he entered. "Griet, you've not yet cleared
up. Be quick about it--I've come to help you move the table."

"I'm sorry for being so slow, sir. It's just--" He seemed surprised
that I wanted to say something--"I'm so used to the objects where they
are that I hate to move them."

"I see. I will help you, then." He plucked the blue cloth from the
table and held it out. His hands were very clean. I took the cloth
from him without touching them and brought it to the window to shake
out. Then I folded it and placed it in a chest in the storeroom. When
I came back he had gathered up the letter and the black ceramic pot
and stored them away. We moved the table to the side of the room and I
set up the chairs by the middle while he moved the easel and painting
to the corner where the scene had been set.

It was odd to see the painting in the place of the setting. It all
felt strange, this sudden movement and change after weeks of stillness
and quiet. It was not like him. I did not ask him why. I wanted to
look at him, to guess what he was thinking, but I kept my eyes on my
broom, cleaning up the dust disturbed by the blue cloth.

He left me and I finished up quickly, not wanting to linger in the
studio. It was no longer comforting there.

That afternoon van Ruijven and his wife visited. Tanneke and I were
sitting on the bench in front while she showed me how to mend some
lace cuffs. The girls had gone over to Market Square and were flying a
kite near the New Church where we could see them, Maertge holding the
end of the string while Cornelia tugged the kite up into the sky.

I saw the van Ruijvens coming from a long way off. As they approached
I recognized her from the painting and my brief meeting with her, and
him as the moustached man with the white feather in his hat and the
oily smile who had once escorted her to the door.

"Look, Tanneke," I whispered, "it's the gentleman who admires the
painting of you every day."

"Oh!" Tanneke blushed when she saw them. Straightening her cap and
apron, she hissed, "Go and tell mistress they're here!"

I ran inside and found Maria Thins and Catharina with the sleeping
baby in the Crucifixion room. "The van Ruijvens have come," I
announced.

Catharina and Maria Thins removed their caps and smoothed their
collars.  Catharina held on to the table and pulled herself up. As
they were leaving the room Maria Thins reached up and straightened one
of Catharina's tortoiseshell combs, which she only wore on special
occasions.

They greeted their guests in the front hall while I hovered in the
hallway. As they moved to the stairs van Ruijven caught sight of me
and paused for a moment.

"Who's this, then?"

Catharina frowned at me. "Just one of the maids. Tanneke, bring us up
some wine, please."

"Have the wide-eyed maid bring it to us," van Ruijven commanded.
"Come, my dear," he said to his wife, who began climbing the stairs.

Tanneke and I stood side by side, she annoyed, me dismayed by his
attention.

"Go on, then!" Catharina cried to me. "You heard what he said. Bring
the wine." She pulled herself heavily up the stairs after Maria Thins.

I went to the little room where the girls slept, found glasses stored
there, polished five of them with my apron and set them on a tray.
Then I searched the kitchen for wine. I did not know where it was
kept, for they did not drink wine often. Tanneke had disappeared in a
huff. I feared the wine was kept locked away in one of the cupboards,
and that I would have to ask Catharina for the key in front of
everyone.

Fortunately, Maria Thins must have anticipated this. In the
Crucifixion room she left out a white jug with a pewter top, filled
with wine. I set it on the tray and carried it up to the studio, first
straightening my cap, collar and apron as the others had done.

When I entered they were standing by the painting. "A jewel once
again," van Ruijven was saying. "Are you happy with it, my dear?" he
addressed his wife.

"Of course," she answered. The light was shining through the windows
onto her face and she looked almost beautiful.

As I set the tray down on the table my master and I had moved that
morning Maria Thins came over. "I'll take that," she whispered. "Off
you go. Quickly, now."

I was on the stairs when I heard van Ruijven say, "Where's that
wide-eyed maid? Gone already? I wanted to have a proper look at her."

"Now, now, she's nothing!" Catharina cried gaily. "It's the painting
you want to look at."

I went back to the front bench and took my seat next to Tanneke, who
wouldn't say a word to me. We sat in silence, working on the cuffs,
listening to the voices floating out from the windows above.

When they came down again I slipped around the corner and waited,
leaning against the warm bricks of a wall in the Molenpoort, until
they were gone.

Later a man servant from their house came and disappeared up to the
studio. I did not see him go, as the girls had come back and wanted me
to build up the fire so they could bake apples in it.

The next morning the painting was gone. I had not had a chance to look
at it one last time.

***


That morning as I arrived at the Meat Hall I heard a man ahead of me
say the quarantine had been lifted. I hurried to Pieter's stall.
Father and son were both there, and several people were waiting to be
served. I ignored them and went straight up to Pieter the son. "Can
you serve me quickly?" I said. "I must go to my family's house. Just
three pounds of tongue and three of sausages."

He stopped what he had been doing, ignoring the indignant sounds from
the old woman he had been helping. "I suppose if I were young and
smiled at you you'd do anything for me too," she scolded as he handed
the packages to me.

"She's not smiling," Pieter replied. He glanced at his father, then
handed me a smaller package. "For your family," he said in a low
voice.

I did not even thank him--I snatched the package and ran.

Only thieves and children run.

I ran all the way home.

My parents were sitting side by side on the bench, heads bowed. When I
reached them I took my father's hand and raised it to my cheek. I sat
next to them and said nothing.

There was nothing to be said.

***


There followed a time when everything was dull. The things that had
meant something--the cleanness of the laundry, the daily walk on
errands, the quiet studio--lost importance, though they were still
there, like bruises on the body that fade to hard lumps under the
skin.

It was at the end of the summer that my sister died. That autumn was
rainy. I spent much of my time hanging laundry on racks indoors,
shifting them closer to the fire, trying to dry the clothes before
mildew took over but without scorching them.

Tanneke and Maria Thins treated me kindly enough when they found out
about Agnes. Tanneke managed to check her irritation for several days,
though soon she began again to scold and sulk, leaving it to me to
placate her. Maria Thins said little but took to cutting off her
daughter when Catharina became sharp with me.

Catharina herself seemed to know nothing of my sister, or did not show
it. She was nearing her confinement, and as Tanneke had predicted she
spent most of her time in bed, leaving the baby Johannes to Maertge's
charge. He was beginning to toddle about, and kept the girls busy.

The girls did not know I had a sister and so would not understand that
I could lose one. Only Aleydis seemed to sense that something was
wrong. She sometimes came to sit by me, pushing her body close to mine
like a pup burrowing into its mother's fur for warmth. She comforted
me in a simple way that no one else could.

One day Cornelia came out to the courtyard where I was hanging up
clothes.  She held out an old doll to me. "We don't play with this
anymore," she announced. "Not even Aleydis. Would you like to give it
to your sister?" She made her eyes wide and innocent, and I knew she
must have overheard someone mention Agnes' death.


"No, thank you," was all I could say, almost choking on the words.

She smiled and skipped away.

The studio remained empty. He did not start another painting. He spent
much of his time away from the house, either at the Guild or at
Mechelen, his mother's inn across the square. I still cleaned the
studio, but it became like any other task, just another room to mop
and dust.

When I visited the Meat Hall I found it hard to meet Pieter the son's
eye. His kindness pained me. I should have returned it but did not. I
should have been flattered but was not. I did not want his attention.
I came to prefer being served by his father, who teased me but did not
demand anything from me but to be critical of his meat. We ate fine
meat that autumn.

On Sundays I sometimes went to Frans' factory and urged him to come
home with me. He did twice, cheering my parents a little. Until a year
before they'd had three children at home. Now they had none. When
Frans and I were both there we reminded them of better times. Once my
mother even laughed, before stopping herself with a shake of her head.
"God has punished us for taking for granted our good fortune," she
said. "We must not forget that."

It was not easy visiting home. I found that after staying away those
few Sundays during the quarantine, home had come to feel like a
strange place. I was beginning to forget where my mother kept things,
what kind of tiles lined the fireplace, how the sun shone in the rooms
at different times of the day.  After only a few months I could
describe the house in Papists' Corner better than my family's.

Frans especially found it hard to visit. After long days and nights at
the factory he wanted to smile and laugh and tease, or at least to
sleep. I suppose I coaxed him there hoping to knit our family together
again. It was impossible, though.  Since my father's accident we had
become a different family.

***


When I came back one Sunday from my parents', Catharina had begun her
labor. I heard her groaning when I stepped inside the front door. I
peeked into the great hall, which was darker than usual--the lower
windows had been shuttered to give her privacy. Maria Thins was there
with Tanneke and the midwife. When Maria Thins saw me she said, "Go
look for the girls--I've sent them out to play. It won't be long now.
Come back in an hour."


I was glad to leave. Catharina was making a great deal of noise, and
it did not seem right to listen to her in that state. I knew too that
she would not want me there.

I looked for the girls in their favorite place, the Beast Market round
the corner from us, where livestock was sold. When I found them they
were playing marbles and chasing one another. Baby Johannes tumbled
after them-- unsteady on his feet, he half walked, half crawled. It was
not the kind of play we would have been allowed on a Sunday, but
Catholics held different views.

When Aleydis grew tired she came to sit with me. "Will Mama have the
baby soon?" she asked.

"Your grandmother said she would. We'll go back in a bit and see
them."

"Will Papa be pleased?"

"I should think so."

"Will he paint more quickly now there's another baby?"

I did not answer. Catharina's words were coming from a little girl's
mouth. I did not want to hear more.

When we returned he was standing in the doorway. "Papa, your cap!"
cried Cornelia. The girls ran up to him and tried to snatch off the
quilted paternity cap he wore, its ribbons dangling below his ears. He
looked both proud and embarrassed. I was surprised--he had become a
father five times before, and I thought he would be used to it. There
was no reason for him to be embarrassed.

It is Catharina who wants many children, I thought then. He would
rather be alone in his studio.

But that could not be quite right. I knew how babies were made. He had
his part to play, and he must have played it willingly. And as
difficult as Catharina could be, I had often seen him look at her,
touch her shoulder, speak to her in a low voice laced with honey.

I did not like to think of him in that way, with his wife and
children. I preferred to think of him alone in his studio. Or not
alone, but with only me.



"You have another brother, girls," he said. "His name is Franciscus.
Would you like to see him?" He led them inside while I hung back in
the street, holding Johannes.

Tanneke opened the shutters of the great hall's lower windows and
leaned out.

"Is the mistress all right?" I asked.

"Oh, yes. She makes a racket but there's nothing behind it. She's made
to have babies--pops them out like a chestnut from its shell. Now come,
master wants to say a prayer of thanks."

Though uncomfortable, I could not refuse to pray with them.
Protestants would have done the same after a good birth. I carried
Johannes into the great hall, which was much lighter now and full of
people. When I set him down he tottered over to his sisters, who were
gathered around the bed. The curtains had been drawn back and
Catharina lay propped against pillows, cradling the baby. Though
exhausted, she was smiling, happy for once. My master stood near her,
gazing down at his new son. Aleydis was holding his hand. Tanneke and
the midwife were clearing away basins and bloody sheets while the new
nurse waited near the bed.

Maria Thins came in from one of the kitchens with some wine and three
glasses on a tray. When she set them down he let go of Aleydis' hand,
stepped away from the bed, and he and Maria Thins kneeled. Tanneke and
the midwife stopped what they were doing and kneeled as well. Then the
nurse and children and I kneeled, Johannes squirming and crying out as
Lisbeth forced him to sit.

My master said a prayer to God, thanking Him for the safe delivery of
Franciscus and for sparing Catharina. He added some Catholic phrases
in Latin which I did not understand, but I did not mind much--he had a
low, soothing voice that I liked to listen to.

When he was done Maria Thins poured three glasses of wine and she and
he and Catharina drank good health to the baby. Then Catharina handed
the baby to the nurse, who put him to her breast.

Tanneke signalled to me and we left the room to get bread and smoked
herring for the midwife and the girls. "We'll begin preparing for the
birth feast now," Tanneke remarked as we were setting things out.
"Young mistress likes a big one. We'll be run off our feet as usual."


The birth feast was the biggest celebration I was to witness in that
house. We had ten days to prepare for it, ten days of cleaning and
cooking. Maria Thins hired two girls for a week to help Tanneke with
the food and me with the cleaning. My girl was slow witted but worked
well as long as I told her exactly what to do and kept a close eye on
her. One day we washed--whether they were clean already or not--all the
tablecloths and napkins that would be needed for the feast, as well as
all the clothes in the house--shirts, robes, bonnets, collars,
handkerchiefs, caps, aprons. The linens took another day.  Then we
washed all the tankards, glasses, earthenware plates, jugs, copper
pots, pancake pans, iron grills and spits, spoons, ladles, as well as
those from the neighbors, who lent them for the occasion. We polished
the brass and the copper and the silver. We took curtains down and
shook them outside, and beat all the cushions and rugs. We polished
the wood of the beds, the cupboards, the chairs and tables, the
windowsills, until everything gleamed.

By the end my hands were cracked and bleeding.

It was very clean for the feast.

Maria Thins placed special orders for lamb and veal and tongue, for a
whole pig, for hare and pheasant and capons, for oysters and lobsters
and caviar and herring, for sweet wine and the best ale, for sweet
cakes prepared specially by the baker.

When I placed the meat order for Maria Thins with Pieter the father,
he rubbed his hands. "So, yet another mouth to feed," he proclaimed.
"All the better for us!"

Great wheels of Gouda and Edam arrived, and artichokes and oranges and
lemons and grapes and plums, and almonds and hazelnuts. Even a
pineapple was sent, gift of a wealthy cousin of Maria Thins. I had
never seen one before, and was not tempted by its rough, prickly skin.
It was not for me to eat anyway. None of the food was, except for the
odd taste Tanneke allowed us.  She let me try a tiny bit of caviar,
which I liked less than I admitted, for all its luxury, and some of
the sweet wine, which was wonderfully spiced with cinnamon.

Extra peat and wood were piled in the courtyard, and spits borrowed
from a neighbor. Barrels of ale were also kept in the courtyard, and
the pig was roasted there. Maria Thins hired a young boy to look after
all the fires, which were in use all night once we began roasting the
pig.

***


Throughout the preparations Catharina remained in bed with Franciscus,
tended by the nurse, serene as a swan. Like a swan too, though, she
had a long neck and sharp beak. I kept away from her.

"This is how she would like the house to be every day," Tanneke
grumbled to me as she was preparing jugged hare and I was boiling
water to wash the windows with. "She wants everything to be in a state
around her. Queen of the bedcovers!" I chuckled with her, knowing I
shouldn't encourage her to be disloyal but cheered none the less when
she was.

He stayed away during the preparations, locked in his studio or
escaping to the Guild. I saw him only once, three days before the
feast. The hired girl and I were polishing candlesticks in the kitchen
when Lisbeth came to find me.  "Butcher's asking for you," she said.
"Out front."

I dropped the polishing cloth, wiped my hands on my apron and followed
her up the hallway. I knew it would be the son. He had never seen me
in Papists' Corner. At least my face was not chapped and red as it
normally was from hanging over the steaming laundry.

Pieter the son had pulled up a cart in front of the house, loaded with
the meat Maria Thins had ordered. The girls were peering into it. Only
Cornelia looked round. When I appeared in the doorway Pieter smiled at
me. I remained calm and did not blush. Cornelia was watching me.

She was not the only one. I felt his presence at my back--he had come
down the hallway behind me. I turned to look at him, and saw that he
had seen Pieter's smile, and the expectation there as well.

He transferred his grey eyes to me. They were cold. I felt dizzy, as
if I had stood up too quickly. I turned back round. Pieter's smile was
not so wide now.  He had seen my dizziness.

I felt caught between the two men. It was not a pleasant feeling.

I stood aside to let my master pass. He turned into the Molenpoort
without a word or glance. Pieter and I watched him go in silence.

"I have your order," Pieter said then. "Where would you like it?"

***



That Sunday when I went home to my parents I did not want to tell them
that another child had been born. I thought it would remind them of
losing Agnes.  But my mother had heard of it at the market and so I
was made to describe to them the birth and praying with the family and
all the preparations that had been made so far for the feast. My
mother was concerned about the state of my hands, but I promised her
the worst was done.

"And a painting?" my father asked. "Has he begun another painting?" He
always hoped that I would describe a new painting to him.

"Nothing," I replied. I had spent little time in the studio that week.
Nothing there had changed.

"Perhaps he is idle," my mother said.

"He is not that," I answered quickly.

"Perhaps he does not want to see," my father said.

"I don't know what he wants," I said more sharply than I had intended.
My mother gazed at me. My father shifted in his seat.

I said nothing more about him.

***


The guests began to arrive around noon on the feast day. By evening
there were perhaps a hundred people in and out of the house, spilling
into the courtyard and the street. All sorts had been invited--wealthy
merchants as well as our baker, tailor, cobbler, apothecary. Neighbors
were there, and my master's mother and sister, and Maria Thins'
cousins. Painters were there, and other Guild members. Van Leeuwenhoek
was there, and van Ruijven and his wife.

Even Pieter the father was there, without his blood-stained apron,
nodding and smiling at me as I passed with a jug of spiced wine.
"Well, Griet," he said as I poured him some, "my son will be jealous
that I'm spending the evening with you."

"I think not," I murmured, pulling away from him, embarrassed.

***


Catharina was the center of attention. She had on a green silk dress
altered to accommodate her belly, which had not yet shrunk. Over it
she wore the ermine-trimmed yellow mantle van Ruijven's wife had worn
for the painting.  It was odd to see it around another woman's
shoulders. I didn't like her wearing it, though it was of course hers
to wear. She also wore a pearl necklace and earrings, and her blond
curls were dressed prettily. She had recovered quickly from the birth,
and was very merry and graceful, her body relieved of some of the
burden it had been carrying over the months. She moved easily through
the rooms, drinking and laughing with her guests, lighting candles,
calling for food, bringing people together. She stopped only to make a
fuss over Franciscus when he was being fed by the nurse.

My master was much quieter. He spent most of his time in one corner of
the great hall, talking to van Leeuwenhoek, though his eyes often
followed Catharina around the room as she moved among her guests. He
wore a smart black velvet jacket and his paternity cap, and looked
comfortable though not much interested in the party. Large crowds did
not appeal to him as they did his wife.

Late in the evening, van Ruijven managed to corner me in the hallway
as I was passing along it with a lighted candle and a wine jug. "Ah,
the wide-eyed maid," he cried, leaning into me. "Hello, my girl." He
grabbed my chin in his hand, his other hand pulling the candle up to
light my face. I did not like the way he looked at me.

"You should paint her," he said over his shoulder.

My master was there. He was frowning. He looked as if he wanted to say
something to his patron but could not.

"Griet, get me some more wine." Pieter the father had popped out from
the Crucifixion room and was holding a cup towards me.

"Yes, sir." I pulled my chin from van Ruijven's grasp and quickly
crossed to Pieter the father. I could feel two pairs of eyes on my
back.

"Oh, I'm sorry, sir, the jug's empty. I'll just get some more from the
kitchen." I hurried away, holding the jug close so they would not
discover that it was full.

When I returned a few minutes later only Pieter the father remained,
leaning against the wall. "Thank you," I said in a low voice as I
filled his glass.


He winked at me. "It was worth it just to hear you call me sir. I'll
never hear that again, will I?" He raised his glass in a mock toast
and drank.

***


After the feast winter descended on us, and the house became cold and
flat.  Besides a great deal of cleaning up, there was no longer
something to look forward to. The girls, even Aleydis, became
difficult, demanding attention, rarely helping. Maria Thins spent
longer in her own rooms upstairs than she had before. Franciscus, who
had remained quiet all the way through the feast, suffered from wind
and began to cry almost constantly. He made a piercing sound that
could be heard throughout the house--in the courtyard, in the studio,
in the cellar. Given her nature, Catharina was surprisingly patient
with the baby, but snapped at everyone else, even her husband.

I had managed to put Agnes from my mind while preparing for the feast,
but memories of her returned even more strongly than before. Now that
I had time to think, I thought too much. I was like a dog licking its
wounds to clean them but making them worse.

Worst of all, he was angry with me. Since the night van Ruijven
cornered me, perhaps even since Pieter the son smiled at me, he had
become more distant. I seemed also to cross paths with him more often
than before. Although he went out a great deal--in part to escape
Franciscus' crying--I always seemed to be coming in the front door as
he was leaving, or coming down the stairs as he was going up, or
sweeping the Crucifixion room when he was looking for Maria Thins
there. One day on an errand for Catharina I even met him in Market
Square. Each time he nodded politely, then stepped aside to let me
pass without looking at me.

I had offended him, but I did not know how.

The studio had become cold and flat as well. Before it had felt busy
and full of purpose--it was where paintings were being made. Now,
though I quickly swept away any dust that settled, it was simply an
empty room, waiting for nothing but dust. I did not want it to be a
sad place. I wanted to take refuge there, as I had before.

One morning Maria Thins came to open the door for me and found it
already unlocked. We peered into the semidarkness. He was asleep at
the table, his head on his arms, his back to the door. Maria Thins
backed out. "Must have come up here because of the baby's cries," she
muttered. I tried to look again


but she was blocking the way. She shut the door softly. "Leave him be.
You can clean there later."

The next morning in the studio I opened all the shutters and looked
around the room for something I could do, something I could touch that
would not offend him, something I could move that he would not notice.
Everything was in its place--the table, the chairs, the desk covered
with books and papers, the cupboard with the brushes and knife
carefully arranged on top, the easel propped against the wall, the
clean palettes next to it. The objects he had painted were packed away
in the storeroom or back in use in the house.

One of the bells of the New Church began to toll the hour. I went to
the window to look out. By the time the bell had finished its sixth
stroke I knew what I would do.

I got some water heated on the fire, some soap and clean rags and
brought them back to the studio, where I began cleaning the windows. I
had to stand on the table to reach the top panes.

I was washing the last window when I heard him enter the room. I
turned to look at him over my left shoulder, my eyes wide. "Sir," I
began nervously. I was not sure how to explain my impulse to clean.

"Stop."

I froze, horrified that I had gone against his wishes.

"Don't move."

He was staring at me as if a ghost had suddenly appeared in his
studio.

"I'm sorry, sir," I said, dropping the rag into the bucket of water.
"I should have asked you first. But you are not painting anything at
the moment and--"

He looked puzzled, then shook his head. "Oh, the windows. No, you may
continue what you were doing."

I would rather not have cleaned in front of him, but as he continued
to stand there I had no choice. I swished the rag in the water, wrung
it out and began wiping the panes again, inside and out.

***


I finished the window and stepped back to view the effect. The light
that shone in was pure.

He was still standing behind me. "Does that please you, sir?" I asked.

"Look over your shoulder at me again."

I did as he commanded. He was studying me. He was interested in me
again.

"The light," I said. "It's cleaner now."

"Yes," he said. "Yes."

The next morning the table had been moved back to the painting corner
and covered with a red, yellow and blue table rug. A chair was set
against the back wall, and a map hung over it.

He had begun again.

***


				   1665

***

My father wanted me to describe the painting once more.  "But nothing
has changed since the last time," I said.

"I want to hear it again," he insisted, hunching over in his chair to
get nearer to the fire. He sounded like Frans when he was a little boy
and had been told there was nothing left to eat in the hotpot. My
father was often impatient during March, waiting for winter to end,
the cold to ease, the sun to reappear.  March was an unpredictable
month, when it was never clear what might happen. Warm days raised
hopes until ice and grey skies shut over the town again.

March was the month I was born.

Being blind seemed to make my father hate winter even more. His other
senses strengthened, he felt the cold acutely, smelled the stale air
in the house, tasted the blandness of the vegetable stew more than my
mother. He suffered when the winter was long.

I felt sorry for him. When I could I smuggled to him treats from
Tanneke's kitchen--stewed cherries, dried apricots, a cold sausage,
once a handful of dried rose petals I had found in Catharina's
cupboard.

"The baker's daughter stands in a bright corner by a window," I began
patiently. "She is facing us, but is looking out the window, down to
her right.  She is wearing a yellow and black fitted bodice of silk
and velvet, a dark blue skirt, and a white cap that hangs down in two
points below her chin."

"As you wear yours?" my father asked. He had never asked this before,
though I had described the cap the same way each time.

"Yes, like mine. When you look at the cap long enough," I added
hurriedly, "you see that he has not really painted it white, but blue,
and violet, and yellow."

"But it's a white cap, you said."

"Yes, that's what is so strange. It's painted many colors, but when
you look at it, you think it's white."

"Tile painting is much simpler," my father grumbled. "You use blue and
that's all. A dark blue for the outlines, a light blue for the
shadows. Blue is blue."

And a tile is a tile, I thought, and nothing like his paintings. I
wanted him to understand that white was not simply white. It was a
lesson my master had taught me.

"What is she doing?" he asked after a moment.

"She has one hand on a pewter pitcher sitting on a table and one on a
window she's partly opened. She's about to pick up the pitcher and
dump the water from it out the window, but she's stopped in the middle
of what she's doing and is either dreaming or looking at something in
the street."

"Which is she doing?"

"I don't know. Sometimes it seems one thing, sometimes the other."

My father sat back in his seat, frowning. "First you say the cap is
white but not painted white. Then you say the girl is doing one thing
or maybe another.  You're confusing me." He rubbed his brow as if his
head ached.

"I'm sorry, Father. I'm trying to describe it accurately."

"But what is the story in the painting?"

"His paintings don't tell stories."

He did not respond. He had been difficult all winter. If Agnes had
been there she would have been able to cheer him. She had always known
how to make him laugh.



"Mother, shall I light the footwarmers?" I asked, turning from my
father to hide my irritation. Now that he was blind, he could easily
sense the moods of others, when he wanted to. I did not like him being
critical of the painting without having seen it, or comparing it to
the tiles he had once painted. I wanted to tell him that if he could
only see the painting he would understand that there was nothing
confusing about it. It may not have told a story, but it was still a
painting you could not stop looking at.

At the time my father and I talked, my mother had been busy around us,
stirring the stew, feeding the fire, setting out plates and mugs,
sharpening a knife to cut the bread. Without waiting for her to answer
I gathered the footwarmers and took them to the back room where the
peat was stored. As I filled them I chided myself for being angry with
my father.

I brought the footwarmers back and lit them from the fire. When I had
placed them under our seats at the table I led my father over to his
chair while my mother spooned out the stew and poured the beer. My
father took a bite and made a face. "Didn't you bring anything from
Papists' Corner to sweeten this mush?" he muttered.

"I couldn't. Tanneke has been difficult with me and I've stayed away
from her kitchen." I regretted it the moment the words left my mouth.

"Why? What did you do?" More and more my father was looking to find
fault with me, at times even siding with Tanneke.

I thought quickly. "I spilled some of their best ale. A whole jug."

My mother looked at me reproachfully. She knew when I lied. If my
father hadn't been feeling so miserable he might have noticed from my
voice as well.

I was getting better at it, though.

When I left to go back my mother insisted on accompanying me part of
the way, even though it was raining, a cold, hard rain. As we reached
the Rietveld Canal and turned right towards Market Square, she said,
"You will be seventeen soon."

"Next week," I agreed.

"Not long now until you are a woman."



"Not long." I kept my eyes on the raindrops pebbling the canal. I did
not like to think about the future.

"I have heard that the butcher's son is paying you attention."

"Who told you that?"

In answer she simply brushed raindrops from her cap and shook out her
shawl.

I shrugged. "I'm sure he's paying me no more attention than he is
other girls."

I expected her to warn me, to tell me to be a good girl, to protect
our family name. Instead she said, "Don't be rude to him. Smile at him
and be pleasant."

Her words surprised me, but when I looked in her eyes and saw there
the hunger for meat that a butcher's son could provide, I understood
why she had set aside her pride.

At least she did not ask me about the lie I had told earlier. I could
not tell them why Tanneke was angry at me. That lie hid a much greater
lie. I would have too much to explain.

Tanneke had discovered what I was doing during the afternoons when I
was meant to be sewing.

I was assisting him.

***


It had begun two months before, one afternoon in January not long
after Franciscus was born. It was very cold. Franciscus and Johannes
were both poorly, with chesty coughs and trouble breathing. Catharina
and the nurse were tending them by the fire in the washing kitchen
while the rest of us sat close to the fire in the cooking kitchen.

Only he was not there. He was upstairs. The cold did not seem to
affect him.

Catharina came to stand in the doorway between the two kitchens.
"Someone must go to the apothecary," she announced, her face flushed.
"I need some things for the boys." She looked pointedly at me.



Usually I would be the last chosen for such an errand. Visiting the
apothecary was not like going to the butcher's or fishmonger's--tasks
Catharina continued to leave to me after the birth of Franciscus. The
apothecary was a respected doctor, and Catharina or Maria Thins liked
to go to him. I was not allowed such a luxury. When it was so cold,
however, any errand was given to the least important member of the
house.

For once Maertge and Lisbeth did not ask to come with me. I wrapped
myself in a woollen mantle and shawls while Catharina told me I was to
ask for dried elder flowers and a coltsfoot elixir. Cornelia hung
about, watching me tuck in the loose ends of the shawls.

"May I come with you?" she asked, smiling at me with well-practiced
innocence. Sometimes I wondered if I judged her too harshly.

"No," Catharina replied for me. "It's far too cold. I won't have
another of my children getting sick. Off you go, then," she said to
me. "Quick as you can."

I pulled the front door shut and stepped into the street. It was very
quiet-- people were sensibly huddled in their houses. The canal was
frozen, the sky an angry grey. As the wind blew through me and I drew
my nose further into the wool folds around my face, I heard my name
being called. I looked around, thinking Cornelia had followed me. The
front door was shut.

I looked up. He had opened a window and poked his head out.

"Sir?"

"Where are you going, Griet?"

"To the apothecary, sir. Mistress asked me. For the boys."

"Will you get me something as well?"

"Of course, sir." Suddenly the wind did not seem so bitter.

"Wait, I'll write it down." He disappeared and I waited. After a
moment he reappeared and tossed down a small leather pouch. "Give the
apothecary the paper inside and bring what he gives you back to me."

I nodded and tucked the pouch into a fold of my shawl, pleased with
this secret request.

The apothecary's was along the Koornmarkt, towards the Rotterdam Gate.
Although it was not far, each breath I took seemed to freeze inside me
so that by the time I pushed into the shop I was unable to speak.

I had never been to an apothecary, not even before I became a maid--my
mother had made all of our remedies. His shop was a small room, with
shelves lining the walls from floor to ceiling. They held all sizes of
bottles, basins and earthenware jars, each one neatly labelled. I
suspected that even if I could read the words I would not understand
what each vessel held. Although the cold killed most smells, here
there lingered an odor I did not recognize, like something in the
forest, hidden under rotting leaves.

I had seen the apothecary himself only once, when he came to
Franciscus' birth feast a few weeks before. A bald, slight man, he
reminded me of a baby bird. He was surprised to see me. Few people
ventured out in such cold. He sat behind a table, a set of scales at
his elbow, and waited for me to speak.

"I've come for my master and mistress," I gasped at last when my
throat had warmed enough for me to speak. He looked blank and I added,
"The Vermeers."

"Ah. How is the growing family?"

"The babies are ill. My mistress needs dried elder flowers and an
elixir of coltsfoot. And my master--" I handed him the pouch. He took
it with a puzzled expression, but when he read the slip of paper he
nodded. "Run out of bone black and ocher," he murmured. "That's easily
repaired. He's never had anyone fetch the makings of colors for him
before, though." He squinted over the slip of paper at me. "He always
gets them himself. This is a surprise."

I said nothing.

"Have a seat, then. Back here by the fire while I get your things
together." He became busy, opening jars and weighing small mounds of
dried flower buds, measuring syrup into a bottle, wrapping things
carefully in paper and string.  He placed some things in the leather
pouch. The other packages he left loose.

"Does he need any canvases?" he asked over his shoulder as he replaced
a jar on a high shelf.

"I wouldn't know, sir. He asked me to get only what was on that
paper."



"This is very surprising, very surprising indeed." He looked me up and
down. I drew myself up--his attention made me wish I were taller.
"Well, it is cold, after all. He wouldn't go out unless he had to." He
handed me the packages and pouch and held the door open for me. Out in
the street I looked back to see him still peering at me through a tiny
window in the door.

Back at the house I went first to Catharina to give her the loose
packages.  Then I hurried to the stairs. He had come down and was
waiting. I pulled the pouch from my shawl and handed it to him.

"Thank you, Griet," he said.

"What are you doing?" Cornelia was watching us from further along the
hallway.

To my surprise he didn't answer her. He simply turned and climbed the
stairs again, leaving me alone to face her.

The truth was the easiest answer, though I often felt uneasy telling
Cornelia the truth. I was never sure what she would do with it. "I've
bought some paint things for your father," I explained.

"Did he ask you to?"

To that question I responded as her father had--I walked away from her
toward the kitchens, removing my shawls as I went. I was afraid to
answer, for I did not want to cause him harm. I knew already that it
was best if no one knew I had run an errand for him.

I wondered if Cornelia would tell her mother what she had seen.
Although young she was also shrewd, like her grandmother. She might
hoard her information, carefully choosing when to reveal it.

She gave me her own answer a few days later.

It was a Sunday and I was in the cellar, looking in the chest where I
kept my things for a collar to wear that my mother had embroidered for
me. I saw immediately that my few belongings had been
disturbed--collars not refolded, one of my chemises balled up and
pushed into a corner, the tortoiseshell comb shaken from its
handkerchief. The handkerchief around my father's tile was folded so
neatly that I became suspicious. When I opened it the tile came apart
in two pieces. It had been broken so that the girl and boy were
separated from


each other, the boy now looking behind him at nothing, the girl all
alone, her face hidden by her cap.

I wept then. Cornelia could not have guessed how that would hurt me. I
would have been less upset if she had broken our heads from our
bodies.

***


He began to ask me to do other things. One day he asked me to buy
linseed oil at the apothecary's on my way back from the fish stalls. I
was to leave it at the bottom of the stairs for him so that he and the
model would not be disturbed.  So he said. Perhaps he was aware that
Maria Thins or Catharina or Tanneke-- or Cornelia--might notice if I
went up to the studio at an unusual time.

It was not a house where secrets could be kept easily.

Another day he had me ask the butcher for a pig's bladder. I did not
understand why he wanted one until he later asked me to lay out paints
he needed each morning when I had finished cleaning. He opened the
drawers to the cupboard near his easel and showed me which paints were
kept where, naming the colors as he went. I had not heard of many of
the words-- ultramarine, vermilion, massicot. The brown and yellow
earth colors and the bone black and lead white were stored in little
earthenware pots, covered with parchment to keep them from drying out.
The more valuable colors--the blues and reds and yellows--were kept in
small amounts in pigs' bladders. A hole was punched in them so the
paint could be squeezed out, with a nail plugging it shut.

One morning while I was cleaning he came in and asked me to stand in
for the baker's daughter, who had taken ill and could not come. "I
want to look for a moment," he explained. "Someone must stand there."

I obediently took her place, one hand on the handle of the water
pitcher, the other on the window frame, opened slightly so that a
chilly draft brushed my face and chest.

Perhaps this is why the baker's daughter is ill, I thought.

He had opened all of the shutters. I had never seen the room so
bright.

"Tilt your chin down," he said. "And look down, not at me. Yes, that's
it.  Don't move."

He was sitting by the easel. He did not pick up his palette or his
knife or his brushes. He simply sat, hands in his lap, and looked.

My face turned red. I had not realized that he would stare at me so
intently.

I tried to think of something else. I looked out the window and
watched a boat moving along the canal. The man poling it was the man
who had helped me get the pot from the canal my first day. How much
has changed since that morning, I thought. I had not even seen one of
his paintings then. Now I am standing in one.

"Don't look at what you are looking at," he said. "I can see it in
your face. It is distracting you."

I tried not to look at anything, but to think of other things. I
thought of a day when our family went out into the countryside to pick
herbs. I thought of a hanging I had seen in Market Square the year
before, of a woman who had killed her daughter in a drunken rage. I
thought of the look on Agnes' face the last time I had seen her.

"You are thinking too much," he said, shifting in his seat.

I felt as if I had washed a tub full of sheets but not got them clean.
"I'm sorry, sir. I don't know what to do."

"Try closing your eyes."

I closed them. After a moment I felt the window frame and the pitcher
in my hands, anchoring me. Then I could sense the wall behind me, and
the table to my left, and the cold air from the window.

This must be how my father feels, I thought, with the space all around
him, and his body knowing where it is.

"Good," he said. "That is good. Thank you, Griet. You may continue
cleaning."

***


I had never seen a painting made from the beginning. I thought that
you painted what you saw, using the colors you saw.


He taught me.

He began the painting of the baker's daughter with a layer of pale
grey on the white canvas. Then he made reddish-brown marks all over it
to indicate where the girl and the table and pitcher and window and
map would go. After that I thought he would begin to paint what he
saw--a girl's face, a blue skirt, a yellow and black bodice, a brown
map, a silver pitcher and basin, a white wall.  Instead he painted
patches of color--black where her skirt would be, ocher for the bodice
and the map on the wall, red for the pitcher and the basin it sat in,
another grey for the wall. They were the wrong colors--none was the
color of the thing itself. He spent a long time on these false colors,
as I called them.

Sometimes the girl came and spent hour after hour standing in place,
yet when I looked at the painting the next day nothing had been added
or taken away.  There were just areas of color that did not make
things, no matter how long I studied them. I only knew what they were
meant to be because I cleaned the objects themselves, and had seen
what the girl was wearing when I peeked at her one day as she changed
into Catharina's yellow and black bodice in the great hall.

I reluctantly set out the colors he asked for each morning. One day I
put out a blue as well. The second time I laid it out he said to me,
"No ultramarine, Griet. Only the colors I asked for. Why did you set
it out when I did not ask for it?" He was annoyed.

"I'm sorry, sir. It's just--" I took a deep breath--"she is wearing a
blue skirt. I thought you would want it, rather than leaving it
black."

"When I am ready, I will ask."

I nodded and turned back to polishing the lion-head chair. My chest
hurt. I did not want him to be angry at me.

He opened the middle window, filling the room with cold air.

"Come here, Griet."

I set my rag on the sill and went to him.

"Look out the window."

***


I looked out. It was a breezy day, with clouds disappearing behind the
New Church tower.

"What color are those clouds?"

"Why, white, sir."

He raised his eyebrows slightly. "Are they?"

I glanced at them. "And grey. Perhaps it will snow."

"Come, Griet, you can do better than that. Think of your vegetables."

"My vegetables, sir?"

He moved his head slightly. I was annoying him again. My jaw
tightened.

"Think of how you separated the whites. Your turnips and your
onions--are they the same white?"

Suddenly I understood. "No. The turnip has green in it, the onion
yellow."

"Exactly. Now, what colors do you see in the clouds?"

"There is some blue in them," I said after studying them for a few
minutes.  "And--yellow as well. And there is some green!" I became so
excited I actually pointed. I had been looking at clouds all my life,
but I felt as if I saw them for the first time at that moment.

He smiled. "You will find there is little pure white in clouds, yet
people say they are white. Now do you understand why I do not need the
blue yet?"

"Yes, sir." I did not really understand, but did not want to admit it.
I felt I almost knew.

When at last he began to add colors on top of the false colors, I saw
what he meant. He painted a light blue over the girl's skirt, and it
became a blue through which bits of black could be seen, darker in the
shadow of the table, lighter closer to the window. To the wall areas
he added yellow ocher, through which some of the grey showed. It
became a bright but not a white wall. When the light shone on the
wall, I discovered, it was not white, but many colors.


The pitcher and basin were the most complicated--they became yellow,
and brown, and green, and blue. They reflected the pattern of the rug,
the girl's bodice, the blue cloth draped over the chair--everything but
their true silver color. And yet they looked as they should, like a
pitcher and a basin.

After that I could not stop looking at things.

***


It became harder to hide what I was doing when he wanted me to help
him make the paints. One morning he took me up to the attic, reached
by a ladder in the storeroom next to the studio. I had never been
there before. It was a small room, with a steeply slanted roof and a
window that let in light and a view of the New Church. There was
little there apart from a small cupboard and a stone table with a
hollow place in it, holding a stone shaped like an egg with one end
cut off. I had seen a similar table once at my father's tile factory.
There were also some vessels--basins and shallow earthenware plates--as
well as tongs by the tiny fireplace.

"I would like you to grind some things here for me, Griet," he said.
He opened a cupboard drawer and took out a black stick the length of
my little finger.  "This is a piece of ivory, charred in the fire," he
explained. "For making black paint."

Dropping it in the bowl of the table, he added a gummy substance that
smelled of animal. Then he picked up the stone, which he called a
muller, and showed me how to hold it, and how to lean over the table
and use my weight against the stone to crush the bone. After a few
minutes he had ground it into a fine paste.

"Now you try." He scooped the black paste into a small pot and got out
another piece of ivory. I took up the muller and tried to imitate his
stance as I leaned over the table.

"No, your hand needs to do this." He placed his hand over mine. The
shock of his touch made me drop the muller, which rolled off the table
and fell on the floor.

I jumped away from him and bent down to pick it up. "I'm sorry, sir,"
I muttered, placing the muller in the bowl.

He did not try to touch me again.


"Move your hand up a little," he commanded instead. "That's right. Now
use your shoulder to turn, your wrist to finish."

It took me much longer to grind my piece, for I was clumsy and
flustered from his touch. And I was smaller than him, and unused to
the movement I was meant to make. At least my arms were strong from
wringing out laundry.

"A little finer," he suggested when he inspected the bowl. I ground
for a few more minutes before he decided it was ready, having me rub
the paste between my fingers so I would know how fine he wanted it.
Then he laid several more pieces of bone on the table. "Tomorrow I
will show you how to grind white lead. It is much easier than bone."

I stared at the ivory.

"What is it, Griet? You're not frightened of a few bones, are you?
They are no different from the ivory comb you use to tidy your hair."

I would never be rich enough to own such a comb. I tidied my hair with
my fingers.

"It's not that, sir." All the other things he had asked of me I was
able to do while cleaning or running errands. No one but Cornelia had
become suspicious. But grinding things would take time--I could not do
it while I was meant to be cleaning the studio, and I could not
explain to others why I must go to the attic at times, leaving my
other tasks. "This will take some time to grind," I said feebly.

"Once you are used to it, it will not take as long as today."

I hated to question or disobey him--he was my master. But I feared the
anger of the women downstairs. "I'm meant to go to the butcher's now,
and to do the ironing, sir. For the mistress." My words sounded petty.

He did not move. "To the butcher's?" He was frowning.

"Yes, sir. The mistress will want to know why I cannot do my other
work. She will want to know that I am helping you, up here. It's not
easy for me to come up for no reason."

There was a long silence. The bell in the New Church tower struck
seven times.

"I see," he murmured when it had stopped. "Let me consider this." He
removed some of the ivory, putting it back in a drawer. "Do this bit
now." He gestured at what was left. "It shouldn't take long. I must go
out. Leave it here when you are done."

He would have to speak to Catharina and tell her about my work. Then
it would be easier for me to do things for him.

I waited, but he said nothing to Catharina.

***


The solution to the problem of the colors came unexpectedly from
Tanneke.  Since Franciscus' birth the nurse had been sleeping in the
Crucifixion room with Tanneke. From there she could get easily to the
great hall to feed the baby when he woke. Although Catharina was not
feeding him herself, she insisted that Franciscus sleep in a cradle
next to her. I thought this a strange arrangement, but when I came to
know Catharina better I understood that she wanted to hold on to the
appearance of motherhood, if not the tasks themselves.

Tanneke was not happy sharing her room with the nurse, complaining
that the nurse got up too often to tend to the baby, and when she did
remain in bed she snored. Tanneke spoke of it to everyone, whether
they listened or not. She began to slacken her work, and blamed it on
not getting enough sleep. Maria Thins told her there was nothing they
could do, but Tanneke continued to grumble. She often threw black
looks at me--before I came to live in the house Tanneke had slept where
I did in the cellar whenever a nurse was needed. It was almost as if
she blamed me for the nurse's snores.

One evening she even appealed to Catharina. Catharina was preparing
herself for an evening at the van Ruijvens', despite the cold. She was
in a good mood--wearing her pearls and yellow mantle always made her
happy. Over her mantle she had tied a wide linen collar that covered
her shoulders and protected the cloth from the powder she was dusting
on her face. As Tanneke listed her woes, Catharina continued to powder
herself, holding up a mirror to inspect the results. Her hair had been
dressed in braids and ribbons, and as long as she kept her happy
expression she was very beautiful, the combination of her blond hair
and light brown eyes making her look exotic.

At last she waved the powder-brush at Tanneke. "Stop!" she cried with
a laugh. "We need the nurse and she must sleep near me. There's no
space in the


girls' room, but there is in yours, so she is there. There's nothing
to be done.  Why do you bother me about it?"

"Perhaps there is one thing that may be done," he said. I glanced up
from the cupboard where I was searching for an apron for Lisbeth. He
was standing in the doorway. Catharina gazed up at her husband in
surprise. He rarely showed interest in domestic affairs. "Put a bed up
in the attic and let someone sleep there. Griet, perhaps."

"Griet in the attic? Why?" Catharina cried.

"Then Tanneke may sleep in the cellar, as she prefers," he explained
mildly.

"But--" Catharina stopped, confused. She seemed to disapprove of the
idea but could not say why.

"Oh yes, madam," Tanneke broke in eagerly. "That would certainly
help." She glanced at me.

I busied myself refolding the children's clothes, though they were
already tidy.

"What about the key to the studio?" Catharina finally found an
argument.  There was only one entrance to the attic, by the ladder in
the studio's storeroom. To get to my bed I would have to pass through
the studio, which was kept locked at night. "We can't give a maid the
key."

"She won't need a key," he countered. "You may lock the studio door
once she has gone to bed. Then in the morning she may clean the studio
before you come and unlock the door."

I paused with my folding. I did not like the idea of being locked into
my room at night.

Unfortunately this notion seemed to please Catharina. Perhaps she
thought locking me away would keep me both safely in one place and out
of her sight.  "All right, then," she decided. She made most decisions
quickly. She turned to Tanneke and me. "Tomorrow you two move a bed to
the attic. This is only temporary," she added, "until the nurse is no
longer needed."

Temporary as my trips to the butcher and fishmonger were meant to be
temporary, I thought.



"Come with me to the studio for a moment," he said. He was looking at
her in a way I had begun to recognize--a painter's way.

"Me?" Catharina smiled at her husband. Invitations to his studio were
rare.  She set down her powder-brush with a flourish and began to
remove the wide collar, now covered with dust.

He reached out and grasped her hand. "Leave that."

This was almost as surprising as his suggestion to move me to the
attic. As he led Catharina upstairs, Tanneke and I exchanged looks.

The next day the baker's daughter began to wear the wide white collar
while modelling for the painting.

***


Maria Thins was not so easily fooled. When she heard from a gleeful
Tanneke about her move to the cellar and mine to the attic she puffed
on her pipe and frowned. "You two could just switch"--she pointed at us
with the pipe--"so that Griet sleeps with the nurse and you go in the
cellar. Then there is no need for anyone to move to the attic."

Tanneke was not listening--she was too full of her victory to notice
the logic in her mistress's words.

"Mistress has agreed to it," I said simply.

Maria Thins gave me a long sideways look.

Sleeping in the attic made it easier for me to work there, but I still
had little time to do so. I could get up earlier and go to bed later,
but sometimes he gave me so much work that I had to find a way to go
up in the afternoons, when I normally sat by the fire and sewed. I
began to complain of not being able to see my stitching in the dim
kitchen, and needing the light of my bright attic room. Or I said my
stomach hurt and I wanted to lie down. Maria Thins gave me that same
sideways look each time I made an excuse, but did not comment.

I began to get used to lying.

Once he had suggested that I sleep in the attic he left it to me to
arrange my duties so that I could work for him. He never helped by
lying for me, or asking

me if I had time to spare for him. He gave me instructions in the
morning and expected them to be done by the next day.

The colors themselves made up for the troubles I had hiding what I was
doing.  I came to love grinding the things he brought from the
apothecary--bones, white lead, madder, massicot--to see how bright and
pure I could get the colors. I learned that the finer the materials
were ground, the deeper the color.  From rough, dull grains madder
became a fine bright red powder and, mixed with linseed oil, a
sparkling paint. Making it and the other colors was magical.

From him I learned too how to wash substances to rid them of
impurities and bring out the true colors. I used a series of shells as
shallow bowls, and rinsed and rerinsed colors, sometimes thirty times,
to get out the chalk or sand or gravel. It was long and tedious work,
but very satisfying to see the color grow cleaner with each wash, and
closer to what was needed.

The only color he did not allow me to handle was ultramarine. Lapis
lazuli was so expensive, and the process of extracting a pure blue
from the stone so difficult, that he worked with it himself.

I grew used to being around him. Sometimes we stood side by side in
the small room, me grinding white lead, him washing lapis or burning
ochers in the fire.  He said little to me. He was a quiet man. I did
not speak either. It was peaceful then, with the light coming in
through the window. When we were done we poured water from a pitcher
over each other's hands and scrubbed ourselves clean.

It was very cold in the attic--although there was the little fire he
used for heating linseed oil or burning colors, I did not dare light
it unless he wanted me to. Otherwise I would have to explain to
Catharina and Maria Thins why peat and wood were disappearing so fast.

I did not mind the cold so much when he was there. When he stood close
to me I could feel the warmth of his body.

I was washing a bit of massicot I had just ground one afternoon when I
heard Maria Thins' voice in the studio below. He was working on the
painting, the baker's daughter sighing occasionally as she stood.

"Are you cold, girl?" Maria Thins asked.

"A little," came the faint reply.


"Why doesn't she have a footwarmer?"

His voice was so low that I didn't hear his answer.

"It won't show in the painting, not by her feet. We don't want her
getting sick again."

Again I could not hear what he said.

"Griet can get one for her," Maria Thins suggested. "She should be in
the attic, for she's meant to have a stomachache. I'll just find her."

She was quicker than I had thought an old woman could be. By the time
I put my foot on the top rung she was halfway up the ladder. I stepped
back into the attic. I could not escape her, and there was no time to
hide anything.

When Maria Thins climbed into the room, she quickly took in the shells
laid in rows on the table, the jug of water, the apron I wore speckled
with yellow from the massicot.

"So this is what you've been up to, eh, girl? I thought as much."

I lowered my eyes. I did not know what to say.

"Stomachache, sore eyes. We are not all idiots around here, you know."

Ask him, I longed to tell her. He is my master. This is his doing.

But she did not call to him. Nor did he appear at the bottom of the
ladder to explain.

There was a long silence. Then Maria Thins said, "How long have you
been assisting him, girl?"

"A few weeks, madam."

"He's been painting faster these last weeks, I've noticed."

I raised my eyes. Her face was calculating.

***


"You help him to paint faster, girl," she said in a low voice, "and
you'll keep your place here. Not a word to my daughter or Tanneke,
now."

"Yes, madam."

She chuckled. "I might have known, clever one that you are. You almost
fooled even me. Now, get that poor girl down there a footwarmer."

***


I liked sleeping in the attic. There was no Crucifixion scene hanging
at the foot of the bed to trouble me. There were no paintings at all,
but the clean scent of linseed oil and the musk of the earth pigments.
I liked my view of the New Church, and the quiet. No one came up
except him. The girls did not visit me as they sometimes had in the
cellar, or secretly search through my things. I felt alone there,
perched high above the noisy household, able to see it from a
distance.

Rather like him.

The best part, however, was that I could spend more time in the
studio.  Sometimes I wrapped myself in a blanket and crept down late
at night when the house was still. I looked at the painting he was
working on by candlelight, or opened a shutter a little to let in
moonlight. Sometimes I sat in the dark in one of the lion-head chairs
pulled up to the table and rested my elbow on the blue and red table
rug that covered it. I imagined wearing the yellow and black bodice
and pearls, holding a glass of wine, sitting across the table from
him.

There was one thing I did not like about the attic, however. I did not
like being locked in at night.

Catharina had got the studio key back from Maria Thins and began to
lock and unlock the door. She must have felt it gave her some control
over me. She was not happy about my being in the attic--it meant I was
closer to him, to the place she was not allowed in but where I could
wander freely.

It must have been hard for a wife to accept such an arrangement.

It worked for a time, however. For a time I was able to slip away in
the afternoons and wash and grind colors for him. Catharina often
slept then-- Franciscus had not settled, and woke her most nights so
that she needed sleep during the day. Tanneke usually fell asleep by
the fire as well, and I could

leave the kitchen without always having to make up an excuse. The
girls were busy with Johannes, teaching him to walk and talk, and
rarely noticed my absence. If they did Maria Thins said I was running
an errand for her, fetching things from her rooms, or sewing something
for her that needed bright attic light to work by. They were children,
after all, absorbed in their own world, indifferent to the adult lives
around them except when it directly affected them.

Or so I thought.

One afternoon I was washing white lead when Cornelia called my name
from downstairs. I quickly wiped my hands, removed the apron I wore
for attic work and changed into my daily apron before climbing down
the ladder to her.  She stood on the threshold of the studio, looking
as if she were standing at the edge of a puddle and tempted to step in
it.

"What is it?" I spoke rather sharply.

"Tanneke wants you." Cornelia turned and led the way to the stairs.
She hesitated at the top. "Will you help me, Griet?" she asked
plaintively. "Go first so that if I fall you will catch me. The stairs
are so steep."

It was unlike her to be scared, even on stairs she did not use much. I
was touched, or perhaps I was simply feeling guilty for being sharp
with her. I descended the stairs, then turned and held out my arms.
"Now you."

Cornelia was standing at the top, hands in her pockets. She started
down the stairs, one hand on the banister, the other balled into a
tight fist. When she was most of the way down she let go and jumped so
that she fell against me, sliding down my front, pressing painfully
into my stomach. Once she regained her feet she began to laugh, head
thrown up, brown eyes narrowed to slits.

"Naughty girl," I muttered, regretting my softness.

I found Tanneke in the cooking kitchen, Johannes in her lap.

"Cornelia said you wanted me."

"Yes, she's torn one of her collars and wants you to mend it. Wouldn't
let me touch it--I don't know why, she knows I mend collars best." As
Tanneke handed it to me her eyes strayed to my apron. "What's that
there? Are you bleeding?"


I looked down. A slash of red dust crossed my stomach like a streak on
a window pane. For a moment I thought of the aprons of Pieter the
father and son.

Tanneke leaned closer. "That's not blood. It looks like powder. How
did that get there?"

I gazed at the streak. Madder, I thought. I ground this a few weeks
ago.

Only I heard the stifled giggle from the hallway.

Cornelia had been waiting some time for this mischief. She had even
managed somehow to get up to the attic to steal the powder.

I did not make up an answer fast enough. As I hesitated, Tanneke's
suspicion grew. "Have you been in the master's things?" she said in an
accusing tone.  She had, after all, modelled for him and knew what he
kept in the studio.

"No, it was--" I stopped. If I tattled on Cornelia I would sound petty
and it would probably not stop Tanneke from discovering what I did in
the attic.

"I think young mistress had better see this," she decided.

"No," I said quickly.

Tanneke drew herself up as much as she could with a sleeping child in
her lap.  "Take off your apron," she commanded, "so I can show it to
the young mistress."

"Tanneke," I said, gazing levelly at her, "if you know what's best for
you, you'll not disturb Catharina, you'll speak to Maria Thins. Alone,
not in front of the girls."

It was those words, with their bullying tone, that caused the most
damage between Tanneke and me. I did not think to sound like that--I
was simply desperate to stop her from telling Catharina any way I
could. But she would never forgive me for treating her as if she were
below me.

My words at least had their effect. Tanneke gave me a hard, angry
look, but behind it was uncertainty, and the desire indeed to tell her
own beloved mistress. She hung between that desire and the wish to
punish my impudence by disobeying me.

"Speak to your mistress," I said softly. "But speak to her alone."

Though my back was to the door, I sensed Cornelia slipping away from
it.

Tanneke's own instincts won. With a stony face she handed Johannes to
me and went to find Maria Thins. Before I settled him on my lap I
carefully wiped away the red pigment with a rag, then threw it in the
fire. It still left a stain. I sat with my arms around the little boy
and waited for my fate to be decided.

I never found out what Maria Thins said to Tanneke, what threats or
promises she made to keep her quiet. But it worked--Tanneke said
nothing about my attic work to Catharina or the girls, or to me. She
became much harder with me, though--deliberately difficult rather than
unthinkingly so. She sent me back to the fish stalls with the cod I
knew she had asked for, swearing she had told me to buy flounder. When
she cooked she became sloppier, spilling as much grease as she could
on her apron so that I would have to soak the cloth longer and scrub
harder to get the grease out. She left buckets for me to empty, and
stopped bringing water to fill the kitchen cistern or mopping the
floors.  She sat and watched me balefully, refusing to move her feet
so that I had to mop around them, to find afterwards that one foot had
covered a sticky puddle of grease.

She did not talk kindly to me any longer. She made me feel alone in a
house full of people.

So I did not dare to take nice things from her kitchen to cheer my
father with.  And I did not tell my parents how hard things were for
me at the Oude Langendijck, how careful I had to be to keep my place.
Nor could I tell them about the few good things--the colors I made, the
nights when I sat alone in the studio, the moments when he and I
worked side by side and I was warmed by his presence.

All I could tell them about were his paintings.

***


One April morning when the cold at last had gone, I was walking along
the Koornmarkt to the apothecary when Pieter the son appeared at my
side and wished me good day. I had not seen him earlier. He wore a
clean apron and carried a bundle, which he said he was delivering
further along the Koornmarkt. He was going the same way as me and
asked if he could walk with me. I nodded--I did not feel I could say
no. Through the winter I had seen him once or twice a week at the Meat
Hall. I always found it hard to meet

his gaze--his eyes felt like needles pricking my skin. His attention
worried me.

"You look tired," he said now. "Your eyes are red. They are working
you too hard."

Indeed, they were working me hard. My master had given me so much bone
to grind that I had to get up very early to finish it. And the night
before Tanneke had made me stay up late to rewash the kitchen floor
after she spilled a pan of grease all over it.

I did not want to blame my master. "Tanneke has taken against me," I
said instead, "and gives me more to do. Then, of course, it's getting
warmer as well and we are cleaning the winter out of the house." I
added this so that he would not think I was complaining about her.

"Tanneke is an odd one," he said, "but loyal."

"To Maria Thins, yes."

"To the family as well. Remember how she defended Catharina from her
mad brother?"

I shook my head. "I don't know what you mean."

Pieter looked surprised. "It was the talk of the Meat Hall for days.
Ah, but you don't gossip, do you? You keep your eyes open but you
don't tell tales, or listen to them." He seemed to approve. "Me, I
hear it all day from the old ones waiting for meat. Can't help but
some of it sticks."

"What did Tanneke do?" I asked despite myself.

Pieter smiled. "When your mistress was carrying the last child but
one-- what's its name?"

"Johannes. Like his father."

Pieter's smile dimmed like a cloud crossing the sun. "Yes, like his
father." He took up the tale again. "One day Catharina's brother,
Willem, came around to the Oude Langendijck, when she was big with
child, and began to beat her, right in the street."


"Why?"

"He's missing a brick or two, they say. He's always been violent. His
father as well. You know the father and Maria Thins separated many
years ago? He used to beat her."

"Beat Maria Thins?" I repeated in wonder. I would never have guessed
that anyone could beat Maria Thins.

"So when Willem began hitting Catharina it seems Tanneke got in
between them to protect her. Even thumped him soundly."

Where was my master when this happened? I thought. He could not have
remained in his studio. He could not have. He must have been out at
the Guild, or with van Leeuwenhoek, or at Mechelen, his mother's inn.

"Maria Thins and Catharina managed to have Willem confined last year,"
Pieter continued. "Can't leave the house he's lodged in. That's why
you haven't seen him. Have you really heard nothing of this? Don't
they talk in your house?"

"Not to me." I thought of all the times Catharina and her mother put
their heads together in the Crucifixion room, falling silent when I
entered. "And I don't listen behind doorways."

"Of course you don't." Pieter was smiling again as if I had told a
joke. Like everyone else, he thought all maids eavesdropped. There
were many assumptions about maids that people made about me.

I was silent the rest of the way. I had not known that Tanneke could
be so loyal and brave, despite all she said behind Catharina's back,
or that Catharina had suffered such blows, or that Maria Thins could
have such a son. I tried to imagine my own brother beating me in the
street but could not.

Pieter said no more--he could see my confusion. When he left me in
front of the apothecary he simply touched my elbow and continued on
his way. I had to stand for a moment looking into the dark green water
of the canal before I shook my head to clear it and turned to the
apothecary's door.

I was shaking from my thoughts a picture of the knife spinning on my
mother's kitchen floor.



***


One Sunday Pieter the son came to services at our church. He must have
slipped in after my parents and me, and sat in the back, for I did not
see him until afterward when we were outside speaking to our
neighbors. He was standing off to one side, watching me. When I caught
sight of him I drew in my breath sharply. At least, I thought, he is
Protestant. I had not been certain before. Since working in the house
at Papists' Corner I was no longer certain of many things.

My mother followed my gaze. "Who is that?"

"The butcher's son."

She gave me a curious look, part surprise, part fear. "Go to him," she
whispered, "and bring him to us."

I obeyed her and went up to Pieter. "Why are you here?" I asked,
knowing I should be more polite.

He smiled. "Hello, Griet. No pleasant words for me?"

"Why are you here?"

"I'm going to services in every church in Delft, to see which I like
best. It may take some time." When he saw my face he dropped his
tone--joking was not the way with me. "I came to see you, and to meet
your parents."

I blushed so hot I felt feverish. "I would rather you did not," I said
softly.

"Why not?"

"I'm only seventeen. I don't--I'm not thinking of such things yet."

"There's no rush," Pieter said.

I looked down at his hands--they were clean, but there were still
traces of blood around his nails. I thought of my master's hand over
mine as he showed me how to grind bone, and shivered.

***


People were staring at us, for he was a stranger to the church. And he
was a handsome man--even I could see that, with his long blond curls,
bright eyes and ready smile. Several young women were trying to catch
his eye.

"Will you introduce me to your parents?"

Reluctantly I led him to them. Pieter nodded to my mother and grasped
my father's hand, who stepped back nervously. Since he had lost his
eyes he was shy of meeting strangers. And he had never before met a
man who showed interest in me.

"Don't worry, Father," I whispered to him while my mother was
introducing Pieter to a neighbor, "you aren't losing me."

"We've already lost you, Griet. We lost you the moment you became a
maid."

I was glad he could not see the tears that pricked my eyes.

***


Pieter the son did not come every week to our church, but he came
often enough that each Sunday I grew nervous, smoothing my skirt more
than it needed, pressing my lips together as we sat in our pew.

"Has he come? Is he here?" my father would ask each Sunday, turning
his head this way and that.

I let my mother answer. "Yes," she would say, "he is here," or "No, he
has not come."

Pieter always said hello to my parents before greeting me. At first
they were uneasy with him. However, Pieter chatted easily to them,
ignoring their awkward responses and long silences. He knew how to
talk to people, meeting so many at his father's stall. After several
Sundays my parents became used to him. The first time my father
laughed at something Pieter said he was so surprised at himself that
he immediately frowned, until Pieter said something else to make him
laugh again.

There was always a moment after they had been speaking when my parents
stepped back and left us alone. Pieter wisely let them decide when.
The first few times it did not happen at all. Then one Sunday my
mother pointedly took my father's arm and said, "Let us go and speak
to the minister."

For several Sundays I dreaded that moment until I too became used to
being on my own with him in front of so many watchful eyes. Pieter
sometimes teased me gently, but more often he asked me what I had been
doing during the week, or told me stories he had heard in the Meat
Hall, or described auctions at the Beast Market. He was patient with
me when I became tongue- tied or sharp or dismissive.

He never asked me about my master. I never told him I was working with
the colors. I was glad he did not ask me.

On those Sundays I felt very confused. When I should be listening to
Pieter I found myself thinking about my master.

One Sunday in May, when I had been working at the house on the Oude
Langendijck for almost a year, my mother said to Pieter just before
she and my father left us alone, "Will you come back to eat with us
after next Sunday's service?"

Pieter smiled as I gaped at her. "I'll come."

I barely heard what he said after that. When he finally left and my
parents and I went home I had to bite my lips so that I would not
shout. "Why didn't you tell me you were going to invite Pieter?" I
muttered.

My mother glanced at me sideways. "It's time we asked him," was all
she said.

She was right--it would be rude of us not to invite him to our house. I
had not played this game with a man before, but I had seen what went
on with others.  If Pieter was serious, then my parents would have to
treat him seriously.

I also knew what a hardship it would be to them to have him come. My
parents had very little now. Despite my wages and what my mother made
from spinning wool for others, they could barely feed themselves, much
less another mouth--and a butcher's mouth at that. I could do little to
help them--take what I could from Tanneke's kitchen, a bit of wood,
perhaps, some onions, some bread. They would eat less that week and
light the fire less, just so that they could feed him properly.

But they insisted that he come. They would not say so to me, but they
must have seen feeding him as a way of filling our own stomachs in the
future. A butcher's wife--and her parents--would always eat well. A
little hunger now would bring a heavy stomach eventually.

Later, when he began coming regularly, Pieter sent them gifts of meat
which my mother would cook for the Sunday. At that first Sunday
dinner, however, she sensibly did not serve meat to a butcher's son.
He would have been able to judge exactly how poor they were by the cut
of the joint. Instead she made a fish stew, even adding shrimps and
lobster, never telling me how she managed to pay for them.

The house, though shabby, gleamed from her attentions. She had got out
some of my father's best tiles, those she had not had to sell, and
polished and lined them up along the wall so Peter could look at them
as he ate. He praised my mother's stew, and his words were genuine.
She was pleased, and blushed and smiled and gave him more. Afterwards
he asked my father about the tiles, describing each one until my
father recognized it and could complete the description.

"Griet has the best one," he said after they had gone through all
those in the room. "It's of her and her brother."

"I'd like to see it," Pieter murmured.

I studied my chapped hands in my lap and swallowed. I had not told
them what Cornelia had done to my tile.

As Pieter was leaving my mother whispered to me to see him to the end
of the street. I walked beside him, sure that our neighbors were
staring, though in truth it was a rainy day and there were few people
out. I felt as if my parents had pushed me into the street, that a
deal had been made and I was being passed into the hands of a man. At
least he is a good man, I thought, even if his hands are not as clean
as they could be.

Close to the Rietveld Canal there was an alley that Pieter guided me
to, his hand at the small of my back. Agnes used to hide there during
our games as children. I stood against the wall and let Pieter kiss
me. He was so eager that he bit my lips. I did not cry out--I licked
away the salty blood and looked over his shoulder at the wet brick
wall opposite as he pushed himself against me. A raindrop fell into my
eye.

I would not let him do all he wanted. After a time Pieter stepped
back. He reached a hand towards my head. I moved away.

"You favor your caps, don't you?" he said.



"I'm not rich enough to dress my hair and go without a cap," I
snapped. "Nor am I a--" I did not finish. I did not need to tell him
what other kind of woman left her head bare.

"But your cap covers all your hair. Why is that? Most women show some
of their hair."

I did not answer.

"What color is your hair?"

"Brown."

"Light or dark?"

"Dark."

Pieter smiled as if he were indulging a child in a game. "Straight or
curly?"

"Neither. Both." I winced at my confusion.

"Long or short?"

I hesitated. "Below my shoulders."

He continued to smile at me, then kissed me once more and turned back
toward Market Square.

I had hesitated because I did not want to lie but did not want him to
know. My hair was long and could not be tamed. When it was uncovered
it seemed to belong to another Griet--a Griet who would stand in an
alley alone with a man, who was not so calm and quiet and clean. A
Griet like the women who dared to bare their heads. That was why I
kept my hair completely hidden--so that there would be no trace of that
Griet.

***


He finished the painting of the baker's daughter. This time I had
warning, for he stopped asking me to grind and wash colors. He did not
use much paint now, nor did he make sudden changes at the end as he
had with the woman with the pearl necklace. He had made changes
earlier, removing one of the


chairs from the painting, and moving the map along the wall. I was
less surprised by such changes, for I'd had the chance to think of
them myself, and knew that what he did made the painting better.

He borrowed van Leeuwenhoek's camera obscura again to look at the
scene one last time. When he had set it up he allowed me to look
through it as well.  Although I still did not understand how it
worked, I came to admire the scenes the camera painted inside itself,
the miniature, reversed pictures of things in the room. The colors of
ordinary objects became more intense--the table rug a deeper red, the
wall map a glowing brown like a glass of ale held up to the sun. I was
not sure how the camera helped him to paint, but I was becoming more
like Maria Thins--if it made him paint better, I did not question it.

He was not painting faster, however. He spent five months on the girl
with the water pitcher. I often worried that Maria Thins would remind
me that I had not helped him to work faster, and tell me to pack my
things and leave.

She did not. She knew that he had been very busy at the Guild that
winter, as well as at Mechelen. Perhaps she had decided to wait and
see if things would change in the summer. Or perhaps she found it hard
to chide him since she liked the painting so much.

"It's a shame such a fine painting is to go only to the baker," she
said one day.  "We could have charged more if it were for van
Ruijven." It was clear that while he painted the works, it was she who
struck the deals.

The baker liked the painting too. The day he came to see it was very
different from the formal visit van Ruijven and his wife had made
several months before to view their painting. The baker brought his
whole family, including several children and a sister or two. He was a
merry man, with a face permanently flushed from the heat of his ovens
and hair that looked as if it had been dipped in flour. He refused the
wine Maria Thins offered, preferring a mug of beer. He loved children,
and insisted that the four girls and Johannes be allowed into the
studio. They loved him as well--each time he visited he brought them
another shell for their collection. This time it was a conch as big as
my hand, rough and spiky and white with pale yellow marks on the
outside, a polished pink and orange on the inside. The girls were
delighted, and ran to get their other shells. They brought them
upstairs and they and the baker's children played together in the
storeroom while Tanneke and I served the guests in the studio.

The baker announced he was satisfied with the painting. "My daughter
looks well, and that's enough for me," he said.


Afterwards, Maria Thins lamented that he had not looked at it as
closely as van Ruijven would have, that his senses were dulled by the
beer he drank and the disorder he surrounded himself with. I did not
agree, though I did not say so. It seemed to me that the baker had an
honest response to the painting. Van Ruijven tried too hard when he
looked at paintings, with his honeyed words and studied expressions.
He was too aware of having an audience to perform for, whereas the
baker merely said what he thought.

I checked on the children in the storeroom. They had spread across the
floor, sorting shells and getting sand everywhere. The chests and
books and dishes and cushions kept there did not interest them.

Cornelia was climbing down the ladder from the attic. She jumped from
three rungs up and shouted triumphantly as she crashed to the floor.
When she looked at me briefly, her eyes were a challenge. One of the
baker's sons, about Aleydis' age, climbed partway up the ladder and
jumped to the floor. Then Aleydis tried it, and another child, and
another.

I had never known how Cornelia managed to get to the attic to steal
the madder that stained my apron red. It was in her nature to be sly,
to slip away when no one was looking. I had said nothing to Maria
Thins or him about her pilfering. I was not sure they would believe
me. Instead I had made sure the colors were locked away whenever he
and I were not there.

I said nothing to her now as she sprawled on the floor next to
Maertge. But that night I checked my things. Everything was there--my
broken tile, my tortoiseshell comb, my prayer book, my embroidered
handkerchiefs, my collars, my chemises, my aprons and caps. I counted
and sorted and refolded them.

Then I checked the colors, just to be sure. They too were in order,
and the cupboard did not look as if it had been tampered with.

Perhaps she was just being a child after all, climbing a ladder to
jump from it, looking for a game rather than mischief.

***


The baker took away his painting in May, but my master did not begin
setting up the next painting until July. I grew anxious about this
delay, expecting Maria Thins to blame me, even though we both knew
that it was not my fault.  Then one day I overheard her tell Catharina
that a friend of van Ruijven's saw the painting of his wife with the
pearl necklace and thought she should be

looking out rather than at a mirror. Van Ruijven had thus decided that
he wanted a painting with his wife's face turned towards the painter.
"He doesn't paint that pose often," she remarked.

I could not hear Catharina's response. I stopped sweeping the floor of
the girls' room for a moment.

"You remember the last one," Maria Thins reminded her. "The maid.
Remember van Ruijven and the maid in the red dress?"

Catharina snorted with muffled laughter.

"That was the last time anyone looked out from one of his paintings,"
Maria Thins continued, "and what a scandal that was! I was sure he
would say no when van Ruijven suggested it this time, but he has
agreed to do it."

I could not ask Maria Thins, who would know I had been listening to
them. I could not ask Tanneke, who would never repeat gossip to me
now. So one day when there were few people at his stall I asked Pieter
the son if he had heard about the maid in the red dress.

"Oh yes, that story went all around the Meat Hall," he answered,
chuckling.  He leaned over and began rearranging the cows' tongues on
display. "It was several years ago now. It seems van Ruijven wanted
one of his kitchen maids to sit for a painting with him. They dressed
her in one of his wife's gowns, a red one, and van Ruijven made sure
there was wine in the painting so he could get her to drink every time
they sat together. Sure enough, before the painting was finished she
was carrying van Ruijven's child."

"What happened to her?"

Pieter shrugged. "What happens to girls like that?"

His words froze my blood. Of course I had heard such stories before,
but never one so close to me. I thought about my dreams of wearing
Catharina's clothes, of van Ruijven grasping my chin in the hallway,
of him saying "You should paint her" to my master.

Pieter had stopped what he was doing, a frown on his face. "Why do you
want to know about her?"

***


"It's nothing," I answered lightly. "Just something I overheard. It
means nothing."

***


I had not been present when he set up the scene for the painting of
the baker's daughter--I had not yet been assisting him. Now, however,
the first time van Ruijven's wife came to sit for him I was up in the
attic working, and could hear what he said. She was a quiet woman. She
did what was asked of her without a sound. Even her fine shoes did not
tap across the tiled floor. He had her stand by the unshuttered
window, then sit in one of the two lion-head chairs placed around the
table. I heard him close some shutters. "This painting will be darker
than the last," he declared.

She did not respond. It was as if he were talking to himself. After a
moment he called up to me. When I appeared he said, "Griet, get my
wife's yellow mantle, and her pearl necklace and earrings."

Catharina was visiting friends that afternoon so I could not ask her
for her jewels. I would have been frightened to anyway. Instead I went
to Maria Thins in the Crucifixion room, who unlocked Catharina's
jewelry box and handed me the necklace and earrings. Then I got out
the mantle from the cupboard in the great hall, shook it out and
folded it carefully over my arm. I had never touched it before. I let
my nose sink into the fur--it was very soft, like a baby rabbit's.

As I walked down the hallway to the stairs I had the sudden desire to
run out the door with the riches in my arms. I could go to the star in
the middle of Market Square, choose a direction to follow, and never
come back.

Instead I returned to van Ruijven's wife and helped her into the
mantle. She wore it as if it were her own skin. After sliding the
earring wires through the holes in her lobes, she looped the pearls
around her neck. I had taken up the ribbons to tie the necklace for
her when he said, "Don't wear the necklace.  Leave it on the table."

She sat again. He sat in his chair and studied her. She did not seem
to mind-- she gazed into space, seeing nothing, as he had tried to get
me to do.

"Look at me," he said.

She looked at him. Her eyes were large and dark, almost black.


He laid a table rug on the table, then changed it for the blue cloth.
He laid the pearls in a line on the table, then in a heap, then in a
line again. He asked her to stand, to sit, then to sit back, then to
sit forward.

I thought he had forgotten that I was watching from the corner until
he said, "Griet, get me Catharina's powder-brush."

He had her hold the brush up to her face, lay it on the table with her
hand still grasping it, leave it to one side. He handed it to me.
"Take it back."

When I returned he had given her a quill and paper. She sat in the
chair, leaning forward, and wrote, an inkwell at her right. He opened
a pair of the upper shutters and closed the bottom pair. The room
became darker but the light shone on her high round forehead, on her
arm resting on the table, on the sleeve of the yellow mantle.

"Move your left hand forward slightly," he said. "There."

She wrote.

"Look at me," he said.

She looked at him.

He got a map from the storeroom and hung it on the wall behind her. He
took it down again. He tried a small landscape, a painting of a ship,
the bare wall.  Then he disappeared downstairs.

While he was gone I watched van Ruijven's wife closely. It was perhaps
rude of me, but I wanted to see what she would do. She did not move.
She seemed to settle into the pose more completely. By the time he
returned, with a still life of musical instruments, she looked as if
she had always been sitting at the table, writing her letter. I had
heard he painted her once before the previous necklace painting,
playing a lute. She must have learned by now what he wanted from a
model. Perhaps she simply was what he wanted.

He hung the painting behind her, then sat down again to study her. As
they gazed at each other I felt as if I were not there. I wanted to
leave, to go back to my colors, but I did not dare disturb the moment.

"The next time you come, wear white ribbons in your hair instead of
pink, and a yellow ribbon where you tie your hair at the back."

She nodded so slightly that her head hardly moved.

"You may sit back."

As he released her, I felt free to go.

***


The next day he pulled up another chair to the table. The day after
that he brought up Catharina's jewelry box and set it on the table.
Its drawers were studded with pearls around the keyholes.

Van Leeuwenhoek arrived with his camera obscura while I was working in
the attic. "You will have to get one of your own some day," I heard
him say in his deep voice. "Though I admit it gives me the opportunity
to see what you're painting. Where is the model?"

"She could not come."

"That is a problem."

"No. Griet," he called.

I climbed down the ladder. When I entered the studio van Leeuwenhoek
gazed at me in astonishment. He had very clear brown eyes, with large
lids that made him look sleepy. He was far from sleepy, though, but
alert and puzzled, his mouth drawn in tightly at the corners. Despite
his surprise at seeing me, he had a kindly look about him, and when he
recovered he even bowed.

No gentleman had ever bowed to me before. I could not stop myself--I
smiled.

Van Leeuwenhoek laughed. "What were you doing up there, my dear?"

"Grinding colors, sir."

He turned to my master. "An assistant! What other surprises do you
have for me? Next you'll be teaching her to paint your women for you."

My master was not amused. "Griet," he said, "sit as you saw van
Ruijven's wife do the other day."


I stepped nervously to the chair and sat, leaning forward as she had
done.

"Take up the quill."

I picked it up, my hand trembling and making the feather shake, and
placed my hands as I had remembered hers. I prayed he would not ask me
to write something, as he had van Ruijven's wife. My father had taught
me to write my name, but little else. At least I knew how to hold the
quill. I glanced at the sheets on the table and wondered what van
Ruijven's wife had written on them. I could read a little, from
familiar things like my prayer book, but not a lady's hand.

"Look at me."

I looked at him. I tried to be van Ruijven's wife.

He cleared his throat. "She will be wearing the yellow mantle," he
said to van Leeuwenhoek, who nodded.

My master stood, and they set up the camera obscura so that it pointed
at me.  Then they took turns looking. When they were bent over the box
with the black robe over their heads, it became easier for me to sit
and think of nothing, as I knew he wanted me to.

He had van Leeuwenhoek move the painting on the back wall several
times before he was satisfied with its position, then open and shut
shutters while he kept his head under the robe. At last he seemed
satisfied. He stood up and folded the robe over the back of the chair,
then stepped over to the desk, picked up a piece of paper, and handed
it to van Leeuwenhoek. They began discussing its contents--Guild
business he wanted advice about. They talked for a long time.

Van Leeuwenhoek glanced up. "For the mercy of God, man, let the girl
get back to her work."

My master looked at me as if surprised that I was still sitting at the
table, quill in hand. "Griet, you may go."

As I left I thought I saw a look of pity cross van Leeuwenhoek's face.

***



He left the camera set up in the studio for some days. I was able to
look through it several times on my own, lingering on the objects on
the table.  Something about the scene he was to paint bothered me. It
was like looking at a painting that has been hung crookedly. I wanted
to change something, but I did not know what. The box gave me no
answers.

One day van Ruijven's wife came again and he looked at her for a long
time in the camera. I was passing through the studio while his head
was covered, and walked as quietly as I could so I would not disturb
them. I stood behind him for a moment to look at the setting with her
in it. She must have seen me but gave no sign, continuing to gaze
straight at him with her dark eyes.

It came to me then that the scene was too neat. Although I valued
tidiness over most things, I knew from his other paintings that there
should be some disorder on the table, something to snag the eye. I
pondered each object--the jewelry box, the blue table rug, the pearls,
the letter, the inkwell--and decided what I would change. I returned
quietly to the attic, surprised by my bold thoughts.

Once it was clear to me what he should do to the scene, I waited for
him to make the change.

He did not move anything on the table. He adjusted the shutters
slightly, the tilt of her head, the angle of her quill. But he did not
change what I had expected him to.

I thought about it while I was wringing out sheets, while I was
turning the spit for Tanneke, while I was wiping the kitchen tiles,
while I was rinsing colors.  While I lay in bed at night I thought
about it. Sometimes I got up to look again. No, I was not mistaken.

He returned the camera to van Leeuwenhoek.

Whenever I looked at the scene my chest grew tight as if something
were pressing on it.

He set a canvas on the easel and painted a coat of lead white and
chalk mixed with a bit of burnt sienna and yellow ocher.

My chest grew tighter, waiting for him.

***


He sketched lightly in reddish brown the outline of the woman and of
each object.

When he began to paint great blocks of false colors, I thought my
chest would burst like a sack that has been filled with too much
flour.

As I lay in bed one night I decided I would have to make the change
myself.

The next morning I cleaned, setting the jewelry box back carefully,
relining the pearls, replacing the letter, polishing and replacing the
inkwell. I took a deep breath to ease the pressure in my chest. Then
in one quick movement I pulled the front part of the blue cloth onto
the table so that it flowed out of the dark shadows under the table
and up in a slant onto the table in front of the jewelry box. I made a
few adjustments to the lines of the folds, then stepped back. It
echoed the shape of van Ruijven's wife's arm as she held the quill.

Yes, I thought, and pressed my lips together. He may send me away for
changing it, but it is better now.

That afternoon I did not go up to the attic, although there was plenty
of work for me there. I sat outside on the bench with Tanneke and
mended shirts. He had not gone to his studio that morning, but to the
Guild, and had dined at van Leeuwenhoek's. He had not yet seen the
change.

I waited anxiously on the bench. Even Tanneke, who tried to ignore me
these days, noted my mood. "What's the matter with you, girl?" she
asked. She had taken to calling me girl like her mistress. "You're
acting like a chicken that knows it's for the slaughter."

"Nothing," I said. "Tell me about what happened when Catharina's
brother came here last. I heard about it at the market. They still
mention you," I added, hoping to distract and flatter her, and to
cover up how clumsily I moved away from her question.

For a moment Tanneke sat up straighter, until she remembered who was
asking. "That's not your business," she snapped. "That's family
business, not for the likes of you."

A few months before she would have delighted in telling a story that
set her in the best light. But it was me who was asking, and I was not
to be trusted or humored or favored with her words, though it must
have pained her to pass up the chance to boast.


Then I saw him--he was walking towards us up the Oude Langendijck, his
hat tilted to shield his face from the spring sunlight, his dark cloak
pushed back from his shoulders. As he drew up to us I could not look
at him.

"Afternoon, sir," Tanneke sang out in a completely different tone.

"Hello, Tanneke. Are you enjoying the sun?"

"Oh yes, sir. I do like the sun on my face."

I kept my eyes on the stitches I had made. I could feel him looking at
me.

After he went inside Tanneke hissed, "Say hello to the master when he
speaks to you, girl. Your manners are a disgrace."

"It was you he spoke to."

"And so he should. But you needn't be so rude or you'll end up in the
street, with no place here."

He must be upstairs now, I thought. He must have seen what I've done.

I waited, barely able to hold my needle. I did not know exactly what I
expected. Would he berate me in front of Tanneke? Would he raise his
voice for the first time since I had come to live in his house? Would
he say the painting was ruined?

Perhaps he would simply pull down the blue cloth so that it hung as it
had before. Perhaps he would say nothing to me.

Later that night I saw him briefly as he came down for supper. He did
not appear to be one thing or the other, happy or angry, unconcerned
or anxious.  He did not ignore me but he did not look at me either.

When I went up to bed I checked to see if he had pulled the cloth to
hang as it had before I touched it.

He had not. I held up my candle to the easel--he had resketched in
reddish brown the folds of the blue cloth. He had made my change.

I lay in bed that night smiling in the dark.


The next morning he came in as I was cleaning around the jewelry box.
He had never before seen me making my measurements. I had laid my arm
along one edge and moved the box to dust under and around it. When I
looked over he was watching me. He did not say anything. Nor did I--I
was concerned to set the box back exactly as it had been. Then I
sponged the blue cloth with a damp rag, especially careful with the
new folds I had made. My hands shook a little as I cleaned.

When I was done I looked up at him.

"Tell me, Griet, why did you change the tablecloth?" His tone was the
same as when he had asked me about the vegetables at my parents'
house.

I thought for a moment. "There needs to be some disorder in the scene,
to contrast with her tranquillity," I explained. "Something to tease
the eye. And yet it must be something pleasing to the eye as well, and
it is, because the cloth and her arm are in a similar position."

There was a long pause. He was gazing at the table. I waited, wiping
my hands against my apron.

"I had not thought I would learn something from a maid," he said at
last.

***


On Sunday my mother joined us as I described the new painting to my
father.  Pieter was with us, and had fixed his eyes on a patch of
sunlight on the floor.  He was always quiet when we talked about my
master's paintings.

I did not tell them about the change I had made that my master
approved of.

"I think his paintings are not good for the soul," my mother announced
suddenly. She was frowning. She had never before spoken of his work.

My father turned his face towards her in surprise.

"Good for the purse, more like," Frans quipped. It was one of the rare
Sundays when he was visiting. Lately he had become obsessed with
money. He questioned me about the value of things in the house on the
Oude Langendijck, of the pearls and mantle in the painting, of the
pearl-encrusted jewelry box and what it held, of the number and size
of paintings that hung on the walls. I did not tell him much. I was
sorry to think it of my own brother, but I feared his

thoughts had turned to easier ways of making a living than as an
apprentice in a tile factory. I suspected he was only dreaming, but I
did not want to fuel those dreams with visions of expensive objects
within his--or his sister's-- reach.

"What do you mean, Mother?" I asked, ignoring Frans.

"There is something dangerous about your description of his
paintings," she explained. "From the way you talk they could be of
religious scenes. It is as if the woman you describe is the Virgin
Mary when she is just a woman, writing a letter. You give the painting
meaning that it does not have or deserve. There are thousands of
paintings in Delft. You can see them everywhere, hanging in a tavern
as readily as in a rich man's house. You could take two weeks' maid's
wages and buy one at the market."

"If I did that," I replied, "you and Father would not eat for two
weeks, and you would die without seeing what I bought."

My father winced. Frans, who had been tying knots in a length of
string, went very still. Pieter glanced at me.

My mother remained impassive. She did not speak her mind often. When
she did her words were worth gold.

"I'm sorry, Mother," I stammered. "I didn't mean--"

"Working for them has turned your head," she interrupted. "It's made
you forget who you are and where you come from. We're a decent
Protestant family whose needs are not ruled by riches or fashions."

I looked down, stung by her words. They were a mother's words, words I
would say to my own daughter if I were concerned for her. Although I
resented her speaking them, as I resented her questioning the value of
his painting, I knew they held truth.

Pieter did not spend so long with me in the alley that Sunday.

The next morning it was painful to look at the painting. The blocks of
false colors had been painted, and he had built up her eyes, and the
high dome of her forehead, and part of the folds of the mantle sleeve.
The rich yellow in particular filled me with the guilty pleasure that
my mother's words had condemned. I tried instead to picture the
finished painting hanging at Pieter the


father's stall, for sale for ten guilders, a simple picture of a woman
writing a letter.

I could not do it.

He was in a good mood that afternoon, or else I would not have asked
him. I had learned to gauge his mood, not from the little he said or
the expression on his face--he did not show much--but from the way he
moved about the studio and attic. When he was happy, when he was
working well, he strode purposefully back and forth, no hesitation in
his stride, no movement wasted.  If he had been a musical man, he
would have been humming or singing or whistling under his breath. When
things did not go well, he stopped, stared out the window, shifted
abruptly, started up the attic ladder only to climb back down before
he was halfway up.

"Sir," I began when he came up to the attic to mix linseed oil into
the white lead I had finished grinding. He was working on the fur of
the sleeve. She had not come that day, but I had discovered he was
able to paint parts of her without her being there.

He raised his eyebrows. "Yes, Griet?"

He and Maertge were the only people in the house who always called me
by my name.

"Are your paintings Catholic paintings?"

He paused, the bottle of linseed oil poised over the shell that held
the white lead. "Catholic paintings," he repeated. He lowered his
hand, tapping the bottle against the table top. "What do you mean by a
Catholic painting?"

I had spoken before thinking. Now I did not know what to say. I tried
a different question. "Why are there paintings in Catholic churches?"

"Have you ever been inside a Catholic church, Griet?"

"No, sir."

"Then you have not seen paintings in a church, or statues or stained
glass?"

"No."


"You have seen paintings only in houses, or shops, or inns?"

"And at the market."

"Yes, at the market. Do you like looking at paintings?"

"I do, sir." I began to think he would not answer me, that he would
simply ask me endless questions.

"What do you see when you look at one?"

"Why, what the painter has painted, sir."

Although he nodded, I felt I had not answered as he wished.

"So when you look at the painting down in the studio, what do you
see?"

"I do not see the Virgin Mary, that is certain." I said this more in
defiance of my mother than in answer to him.

He gazed at me in surprise. "Did you expect to see the Virgin Mary?"

"Oh no, sir," I replied, flustered.

"Do you think the painting is Catholic?"

"I don't know, sir. My mother said--"

"Your mother has not seen the painting, has she?"

"No."

"Then she cannot tell you what it is that you see or do not see."

"No." Although he was right, I did not like him to be critical of my
mother.

"It's not the painting that is Catholic or Protestant," he said, "but
the people who look at it, and what they expect to see. A painting in
a church is like a candle in a dark room--we use it to see better. It
is the bridge between ourselves and God. But it is not a Protestant
candle or a Catholic candle. It is simply a candle."

"We do not need such things to help us to see God," I countered. "We
have His Word, and that is enough."

He smiled. "Did you know, Griet, that I was brought up as a
Protestant? I converted when I married. So you do not need to preach
to me. I have heard such words before."

I stared at him. I had never known anyone to decide no longer to be a
Protestant. I did not believe you really could switch. And yet he had.

He seemed to be waiting for me to speak.

"Though I have never been inside a Catholic church," I began slowly,
"I think that if I saw a painting there, it would be like yours. Even
though they are not scenes from the Bible, or the Virgin and Child, or
the Crucifixion." I shivered, thinking of the painting that had hung
over my bed in the cellar.

He picked up the bottle again and carefully poured a few drops of oil
into the shell. With his palette knife he began to mix the oil and
white lead together until the paint was like butter that has been left
out in a warm kitchen. I was bewitched by the movement of the silvery
knife in the creamy white paint.

"There is a difference between Catholic and Protestant attitudes to
painting," he explained as he worked, "but it is not necessarily as
great as you may think.  Paintings may serve a spiritual purpose for
Catholics, but remember too that Protestants see God everywhere, in
everything. By painting everyday things-- tables and chairs, bowls and
pitchers, soldiers and maids--are they not celebrating God's creation
as well?"

I wished my mother could hear him. He would have made even her
understand.

***


Catharina did not like to have her jewelry box left in the studio,
where she could not get to it. She was suspicious of me, in part
because she did not like me, but also because she was influenced by
the stories we had all heard of maids stealing silver spoons from
their mistresses. Stealing and tempting the master of the house--that
was what mistresses were always looking for in maids.

***


As I had discovered with van Ruijven, however, it was more often the
man pursuing the maid than the other way around. To him a maid came
free.

Although she rarely consulted him about household things, Catharina
went to her husband to ask that something be done. I did not hear them
talk of it myself--Maertge told me one morning. Maertge and I got on
well at that time.  She had grown older suddenly, losing interest in
the other children, preferring to be with me in the mornings as I went
about my work. From me she learned to sprinkle clothes with water to
bleach them in the sun, to apply a mixture of salt and wine to grease
stains to get them out, to scrub the flatiron with coarse salt so that
it would not stick and scorch. Her hands were too fine to work in
water, however--she could watch me but I would not let her wet her
hands.  My own were ruined by now--hard and red and cracked, despite my
mother's remedies to soften them. I had work hands and I was not yet
eighteen.

Maertge was a little like my sister, Agnes, had been--lively,
questioning, quick to decide what she thought. But she was also the
eldest, with the eldest's seriousness of purpose. She had looked after
her sisters, as I had looked after my brother and sister. That made a
girl cautious and wary of change.

"Mama wants her jewelry box back," she announced as we passed around
the star in Market Square on our way to the Meat Hall. "She has spoken
to Papa about it."

"What did she say?" I tried to sound unconcerned as I eyed the points
of the star. I had noticed recently that when Catharina unlocked the
studio door for me each morning she peered into the room at the table
where her jewels lay.

Maertge hesitated. "Mama doesn't like it that you are locked up with
her jewelry at night," she said at last. She did not add what
Catharina was worried about--that I might pick up the pearls from the
table, tuck the box under my arm, and climb from the window to the
street, to escape to another city and another life.

In her way Maertge was trying to warn me. "She wants you to sleep
downstairs again," she continued. "The nurse is leaving soon and there
is no reason for you to remain in the attic. She said either you or
the jewelry box must go."

"And what did your father say?"

"He didn't say anything. He will think about it."


My heart grew heavy like a stone in my chest. Catharina had asked him
to choose between me and the jewelry box. He could not have both. But
I knew he would not remove the box and pearls from the painting to
keep me in the attic. He would remove me. I would no longer assist
him.

I slowed my pace. Years of hauling water, wringing out clothes,
scrubbing floors, emptying chamberpots, with no chance of beauty or
color or light in my life, stretched before me like a landscape of
flat land where, a long way off, the sea is visible but can never be
reached. If I could not work with the colors, if I could not be near
him, I did not know how I could continue to work in that house.

When we arrived at the butcher's stall and Pieter the son was not
there, my eyes unexpectedly filled with tears. I had not realized that
I had wanted to see his kind, handsome face. Confused as I felt about
him, he was my escape, my reminder that there was another world I
could join. Perhaps I was not so different from my parents, who looked
on him to save them, to put meat on their table.

Pieter the father was delighted by my tears. "I will tell my son you
wept to find him gone," he declared, scrubbing his chopping board
clean of blood.

"You will do no such thing," I muttered. "Maertge, what do we want
today?"

"Stewing beef," she answered promptly. "Four pounds."

I wiped my eyes with a corner of my apron. "There's a fly in my eye,"
I said briskly. "Perhaps it is not so clean around here. The dirt
attracts flies."

Pieter the father laughed heartily. "Fly in her eye, she says! Dirt
here. Of course there are flies--they come for the blood, not the dirt.
The best meat is the bloodiest and attracts the most flies. You'll
find out for yourself someday.  No need to put on airs with us,
madam." He winked at Maertge. "What do you think, miss? Should young
Griet condemn a place when she'll be serving there herself in a few
years?"

Maertge tried not to look shocked, but she was clearly surprised by
his suggestion that I might not be with her family for always. She had
the sense not to answer him--instead she took a sudden interest in the
baby a woman at the next stall was holding.

***



"Please," I said in a low voice to Pieter the father, "don't say such
things to her, or any of the family, even in jest. I am their maid.
That is what I am. To suggest otherwise is to show them disrespect."

Pieter the father regarded me. His eyes changed color with every shift
in the light. I did not think even my master could have captured them
in paint.  "Perhaps you're right," he conceded. "I can see I'll have
to be more careful when I tease you. But I'll tell you one thing, my
dear--you'd best get used to flies."

***


He did not remove the jewelry box, and he did not ask me to leave.
Instead he brought the box and pearls and earrings to Catharina every
evening, and she locked them away in the cupboard in the great hall
where she kept the yellow mantle. In the morning when she unlocked the
studio door to let me out she handed me the box and jewels. My first
task in the studio became to place the box and pearls back on the
table, and set out the earrings if van Ruijven's wife was coming to
model. Catharina watched from the doorway as I made the measurements
with my arms and hands. My gestures would have looked odd to anyone,
but she never asked what I was doing. She did not dare.

Cornelia must have known about the problem with the jewelry box.
Perhaps like Maertge she had overheard her parents discussing it. She
may have seen Catharina bringing up the box in the morning and him
carrying it down again at night, and guessed something was wrong.
Whatever she saw or understood, she decided it was time to stir the
pot once more.

For no particular reason but a vague distrust, she did not like me.
She was very like her mother in that way.

She began it, as she had with the torn collar and the red paint on my
apron, with a request. Catharina was dressing her hair one rainy
morning, Cornelia idling at her side, watching. I was starching
clothes in the washing kitchen so I did not hear them. But it was
probably she who suggested that her mother wear tortoiseshell combs in
her hair.

A few minutes later Catharina came to the doorway separating the
washing and cooking kitchens and announced, "One of my combs is
missing. Has either of you seen it?" Although she was speaking to both
Tanneke and me, she was staring hard at me.



"No, madam," Tanneke replied solemnly, coming from the cooking kitchen
to stand in the doorway as well so she could look at me.

"No, madam," I echoed. When I saw Cornelia peeking in from the
hallway, with the mischievous look so natural to her, I knew she had
begun something that would once again lead to me.

She will do this until she drives me away, I thought.

"Someone must know where it is," Catharina said.

"Shall I help you search the cupboard again, madam?" Tanneke asked.
"Or shall we look elsewhere?" she added pointedly.

"Perhaps it is in your jewelry box," I suggested.

"Perhaps."

Catharina passed into the hallway. Cornelia turned and followed her.

I thought she would pay no attention to my suggestion, since it came
from me.  When I heard her on the stairs, however, I realized she was
heading to the studio, and hurried to join her--she would need me. She
was waiting, furious, in the studio doorway, Cornelia lingering behind
her.

"Bring the box to me," Catharina ordered quietly, the humiliation of
not being able to enter the room tingeing her words with an edge I had
not heard before.  She had often spoken sharply and loudly. The quiet
control of her tone this time was much more frightening.

I could hear him in the attic. I knew what he was doing--he was
grinding lapis for paint for the tablecloth.

I picked up the box and brought it to Catharina, leaving the pearls on
the table.  Without a word she carried it downstairs, Cornelia once
again trailing behind her like a cat thinking it is about to be fed.
She would go to the great hall and sort through all her jewels, to see
if anything else was missing. Perhaps other things were--it was hard to
guess what a seven-year-old determined to make mischief might do.

She would not find the comb in her box. I knew exactly where it was.


I did not follow her, but climbed up to the attic.

He looked at me in surprise, his hand holding the muller suspended
above the bowl, but he did not ask me why I had come upstairs. He
began grinding again.

I opened the chest where I kept my things and unwrapped the comb from
its handkerchief. I rarely looked at the comb--in that house I had no
reason to wear it or even to admire it. It reminded me too much of the
kind of life I could never have as a maid. Now that I knew to look at
it closely, I could see it was not my grandmother's, though very
similar. The scallop shape at the end of it was longer and more
curved, and there were tiny serrated marks on each panel of the
scallop. It was finer than my grandmother's, though not so much finer.

I wonder if I will ever see my grandmother's comb again, I thought.

I sat for so long on the bed, the comb in my lap, that he stopped
grinding again.

"What is wrong, Griet?"

His tone was gentle. That made it easier to say what I had no choice
but to say.

"Sir," I declared at last, "I need your help."

I remained in my attic room, sitting on my bed, hands in my lap, while
he spoke to Catharina and Maria Thins, while they searched Cornelia,
then searched among the girls' things for my grandmother's comb.
Maertge finally found it, hidden in the large shell the baker had
given them when he came to see his painting. That was probably when
Cornelia had switched the combs, climbing down from the attic while
the children were all playing in the storeroom and hiding my comb
inside the first thing she could find.

It was Maria Thins who had to beat Cornelia--he made it clear it was
not his duty, and Catharina refused to, even when she knew that
Cornelia should be punished. Maertge told me later that Cornelia did
not cry, but sneered throughout the beating.

It was Maria Thins too who came to see me in the attic. "Well, girl,"
she said, leaning against the grinding table, "you have set the cat
loose in the poultry house now."


"I did nothing," I protested.

"No, but you have managed to make a few enemies. Why is that? We've
never had so much trouble with other help." She chuckled, but behind
her laugh she was sober. "But he has backed you, in his way," she
continued, "and that is more powerful than anything Catharina or
Cornelia or Tanneke or even I may say against you."

She tossed my grandmother's comb in my lap. I wrapped it in a
handkerchief and replaced it in the chest. Then I turned to Maria
Thins. If I did not ask her now, I would never know. This might be the
only time she would be willing to answer me. "Please, madam, what did
he say? About me?"

Maria Thins gave me a knowing look. "Don't flatter yourself, girl. He
said very little about you. But it was clear enough. That he came
downstairs at all and concerned himself--my daughter knew then that he
was taking your side.  No, he charged her with failing to raise her
children properly. Much cleverer, you see, to criticize her than to
praise you."

"Did he explain that I was--assisting him?"

"No."

I tried not to let my face show what I felt, but the very question
must have made my feelings clear.

"But I told her, once he had gone," Maria Thins added. "It's nonsense,
you sneaking around, keeping secrets from her in her own house." She
sounded as if she were blaming me, but then she muttered, "I would
have thought better of him." She stopped, looking as if she wished she
hadn't revealed so much of her own mind.

"What did she say when you told her?"

"She's not happy, of course, but she's more afraid of his anger."
Maria Thins hesitated. "There's another reason why she's not so
concerned. I may as well tell you now. She's carrying a child again."

"Another?" I let slip. I was surprised that Catharina would want
another child when they were so short of money.

Maria Thins frowned at me. "Watch yourself, girl."

"I'm sorry, madam." I instantly regretted having spoken even that one
word. It was not for me to say how big their family should be. "Has
the doctor been?" I asked, trying to make amends.

"Doesn't need to. She knows the signs, she's been through it enough."
For a moment Maria Thins' face made clear her thoughts--she too
wondered about so many children. Then she became stern again. "You go
about your duties, stay out of her way, and help him, but don't parade
it in front of the house.  Your place here is not so secure."

I nodded and let my eyes rest on her gnarled hands as they fumbled
with a pipe. She lit it and puffed for a moment. Then she chuckled.
"Never so much trouble with a maid before. Lord love us!"

On Sunday I took the comb back to my mother. I did not tell her what
had happened--I simply said it was too fine for a maid to keep.

***


Some things changed for me in the house after the trouble with the
comb.  Catharina's treatment of me was the greatest surprise. I had
expected that she would be even more difficult than before--give me
more work, berate me whenever she could, make me as uncomfortable as
possible. Instead she seemed to fear me. She removed the studio key
from the precious bunch at her hip and handed it back to Maria Thins,
never locking or unlocking the door again. She left her jewelry box in
the studio, sending her mother to fetch what she needed from it. She
avoided me as much as she could. Once I understood this, I kept out of
her way as well.

She did not say anything about my afternoon work in the attic. Maria
Thins must have impressed upon her the notion that my help would make
him paint more, and support the child she carried as well as those she
had already. She had taken to heart his words about her care of the
children, who were after all her main charge, and began to spend more
time with them than she had before.  With the encouragement of Maria
Thins, she even began to teach Maertge and Lisbeth to read and write.

Maria Thins was more subtle, but she too changed toward me, treating
me with more respect. I was still clearly a maid, but she did not
dismiss me so readily, or ignore me, as she did sometimes with
Tanneke. She would not go so far as to ask my opinion, but she made me
feel less excluded from the household.


I was also surprised when Tanneke softened toward me. I had thought
she enjoyed being angry and bearing me a grudge, but perhaps it had
worn her out.  Or perhaps once it was clear that he took my side, she
felt it best not to appear to be opposed to me. Perhaps they all felt
like that. Whatever the reason, she stopped creating extra work for me
by spilling things, stopped muttering about me under her breath and
giving me hard sideways looks. She did not befriend me, but it became
easier to work with her.

It was cruel, perhaps, but I felt I had won a battle against her. She
was older and had been a part of the household for much longer, but
his favoring me clearly carried more weight than her loyalty and
experience. She could have felt this slight deeply, but she accepted
defeat more easily than I would have expected. Tanneke was a simple
creature underneath, and wanted an easy time of it. The easiest way
was to accept me.

Although her mother took closer charge of her, Cornelia did not
change. She was Catharina's favorite, perhaps because she most
resembled her in spirit, and Catharina would do little to tame her
ways. Sometimes she looked at me with her light brown eyes, her head
tilted so that her red curls dangled about her face, and I thought of
the sneer Maertge had described as Cornelia's expression while she was
being beaten. And I thought again, as I had on my first day: She will
be a handful.

Though I did not make a show of it, I avoided Cornelia as I did her
mother. I did not wish to encourage her. I hid the broken tile, my
best lace collar, which my mother had made for me, and my finest
embroidered handkerchief, so that she could not use them against me.

He did not treat me differently after the affair of the comb. When I
thanked him for speaking up for me, he shook his head as if shooing
away a fly that buzzed about him.

It was I who felt differently about him. I felt indebted. I felt that
if he asked me to do something I could not say no. I did not know what
he would ask that I would want to say no to, but nonetheless I did not
like the position I had come to be in.

I was disappointed in him as well, though I did not like to think
about it. I had wanted him to tell Catharina himself about my
assisting him, to show that he was not afraid to tell her, that he
supported me.

That is what I wanted.



***


Maria Thins came to see him in his studio one afternoon in the middle
of October, when the painting of van Ruijven's wife was nearly
complete. She must have known I was working in the attic and could
hear her, but nevertheless she spoke directly to him.

She asked him what he intended to paint next. When he did not reply
she said, "You must paint a larger painting, with more figures in it,
as you used to. Not another woman alone with only her thoughts. When
van Ruijven comes to see his painting you must suggest another to him.
Perhaps a companion piece to something you've already painted for him.
He will agree--he usually does.  And he will pay more for it."

He still did not respond.

"We're further in debt," Maria Thins said bluntly. "We need the
money."

"He may ask that she be in it," he said. His voice was low but I was
able to hear what he said, though only later did I understand what he
meant.

"So?"

"No. Not like that."

"We'll worry about that when it happens, not before."

A few days later van Ruijven and his wife came to see the finished
painting. In the morning my master and I prepared the room for their
visit. He took the pearls and jewelry box down to Catharina while I
put away everything else and set out chairs. Then he moved the easel
and painting into the place where the setting had been and had me open
all the shutters.

That morning I helped Tanneke prepare a special dinner for them. I did
not think I would have to see them, and when they came at noon it was
Tanneke who took up wine as they gathered in the studio. When she
returned, however, she announced that I was to help her serve dinner
rather than Maertge, who was old enough to join them at the table. "My
mistress has decided this," she added.

I was surprised--the last time they viewed their painting Maria Thins
had tried to keep me away from van Ruijven. I did not say so to
Tanneke, though. "Is

van Leeuwenhoek there too?" I asked instead. "I thought I heard his
voice in the hallway."

Tanneke nodded absently. She was tasting the roasted pheasant. "Not
bad," she murmured. "I can hold my head as high as any cook of van
Ruijven's."

While she was upstairs I had basted the pheasant and sprinkled it with
salt, which Tanneke used too sparingly.

When they came down to dinner and everyone was seated, Tanneke and I
began to bring in the dishes. Catharina glared at me. Never good at
concealing her thoughts, she was horrified to see that I was serving.

My master too looked as if he had cracked his tooth on a stone. He
stared coldly at Maria Thins, who feigned indifference behind her
glass of wine.

Van Ruijven, however, grinned. "Ah, the wide-eyed maid!" he cried. "I
wondered where you'd got to. How are you, my girl?"

"Very well, sir, thank you," I murmured, placing a slice of pheasant
on his plate and moving away as quickly as I could. Not quickly
enough, however-- he managed to slide his hand along my thigh. I could
still feel the ghost of it a few minutes later.

While van Ruijven's wife and Maertge remained oblivious, van
Leeuwenhoek noted everything--Catharina's fury, my master's irritation,
Maria Thins' shrug, van Ruijven's lingering hand. When I served him he
searched my face as if looking there for the answer to how a simple
maid could cause so much trouble. I was grateful to him--there was no
blame in his expression.

Tanneke too had noticed the stir I caused, and for once was helpful.
We said nothing in the kitchen, but it was she who made the trips back
to the table to bring out the gravy, to refill the wine, to serve more
food, while I looked after things in the kitchen. I had to go back
only once, when we were both to clear away the plates. Tanneke went
directly to van Ruijven's place while I took up plates at the other
end of the table. Van Ruijven's eyes followed me everywhere.

So did my master's.

I tried to ignore them, instead listening to Maria Thins. She was
discussing the next painting. "You were pleased with the one of the
music lesson, weren't


you?" she said. "What better to follow such a painting with than
another with a musical setting? After a lesson, a concert, perhaps
with more people in it, three or four musicians, an audience--"

"No audience," my master interrupted. "I do not paint audiences."

Maria Thins regarded him skeptically.

"Come, come," van Leeuwenhoek interjected genially, "surely an
audience is less interesting than the musicians themselves."

I was glad he defended my master.

"I don't care about audiences," van Ruijven announced, "but I would
like to be in the painting. I will play the lute." After a pause he
added, "I want her in it too." I did not have to look at him to know
he had gestured at me.

Tanneke jerked her head slightly towards the kitchen and I escaped
with the little I had cleared, leaving her to gather the rest. I
wanted to look at my master but did not dare. As I was leaving I heard
Catharina say in a gay voice, "What a fine idea! Like that painting
with you and the maid in the red dress. Do you remember her?"

***


On Sunday my mother spoke to me when we were alone in her kitchen. My
father was sitting out in the late October sun while we prepared
dinner. "You know I don't listen to market gossip," she began, "but it
is hard not to hear it when my daughter's name is mentioned."

I immediately thought of Pieter the son. Nothing we did in the alley
was worthy of gossip. I had insisted on that. "I don't know what you
mean, Mother," I answered honestly.

My mother pulled in the corners of her mouth. "They are saying your
master is going to paint you." It was as if the words themselves made
her mouth purse.

I stopped stirring the pot I had been tending. "Who says this?"

My mother sighed, reluctant to pass along overheard tales. "Some women
selling apples."


When I did not respond she took my silence to mean the worst. "Why
didn't you tell me, Griet?"

"Mother, I haven't even heard this myself. No one has said anything to
me!"

She did not believe me.

"It's true," I insisted. "My master has said nothing, Maria Thins has
said nothing. I simply clean his studio. That's as close as I get to
his paintings." I had never told her about my attic work. "How can you
believe old women selling apples rather than me?"

"When there's talk about someone at the market, there's usually a
reason for it, even if it's not what's actually being said." My mother
left the kitchen to call my father. She would say no more about the
subject that day, but I began to fear she might be right--I would be
the last to be told.

The next day at the Meat Hall I decided to ask Pieter the father about
the rumor. I did not dare speak of it to Pieter the son. If my mother
had heard the gossip, he would have as well. I knew he would not be
pleased. Although he had never said so to me, it was clear he was
jealous of my master.

Pieter the son was not at the stall. I did not have to wait long for
Pieter the father to say something himself. "What's this I hear?" he
smirked as I approached. "Going to have your picture painted, are you?
Soon you'll be too grand for the likes of my son. He's gone off in a
sulk to the Beast Market because of you."

"Tell me what you have heard."

"Oh, you want it told again, do you?" He raised his voice. "Shall I
make it into a fine tale for a few others?"

"Hush," I hissed. Underneath his bravado I sensed he was angry with
me. "Just tell me what you have heard."

Pieter the father lowered his voice. "Only that van Ruijven's cook was
saying you are to sit with her master for a painting."

"I know nothing of this," I stated firmly, aware even as I said it
that, as with my mother, my words had little effect. Pieter the father
scooped up a handful



of pigs' kidneys. "It's not me you should be talking to," he said,
weighing them in his hand.

I waited a few days before speaking to Maria Thins. I wanted to see if
anyone would tell me first. I found her in the Crucifixion room one
afternoon when Catharina was asleep and Maertge had taken the girls to
the Beast Market.  Tanneke was in the kitchen sewing and watching
Johannes and Franciscus.

"May I speak to you, madam?" I said in a low voice.

"What is it, girl?" She lit her pipe and regarded me through the
smoke.  "Trouble again?" She sounded weary.

"I don't know, madam. But I have heard a strange thing."

"So have we all heard strange things."

"I have heard that--that I am to be in a painting. With van Ruijven."

Maria Thins chuckled. "Yes, that is a strange thing. They've been
talking in the market, have they?"

I nodded.

She leaned back in her chair and puffed on her pipe. "Tell me, what
would you think of being in such a painting?"

I did not know what to answer. "What would I think, madam?" I repeated
dumbly.

"I wouldn't bother to ask some people that. Tanneke, for instance.
When he painted her she stood there happily pouring milk for months
without a thought passing through that head, God love her. But you--no,
there's all manner of things you think but don't say. I wonder what
they are?"

I said the one sensible thing I knew she would understand. "I do not
wish to sit with van Ruijven, madam. I do not think his intentions are
honorable." My words were stiff.

"His intentions are never honorable when it comes to young women."

I nervously wiped my hands on my apron.

"It seems you have a champion to defend your honor," she continued.
"My son-in-law is no more willing to paint you with van Ruijven than
you are willing to sit with him."

I did not try to hide my relief.

"But," Maria Thins warned, "van Ruijven is his patron, and a wealthy
and powerful man. We cannot afford to offend him."

"What will you say to him, madam?"

"I'm still trying to decide. In the meantime, you will have to put up
with the rumors. Don't answer them--we don't want van Ruijven hearing
from the market gossips that you are refusing to sit with him."

I must have looked uncomfortable. "Don't worry, girl," Maria Thins
growled, tapping her pipe on the table to loosen the ash. "We'll take
care of this. You keep your head down and go about your work, and not
a word to anyone."

"Yes, madam."

I did tell one person, though. I felt I had to.

It had been easy enough to avoid Pieter the son--there were auctions
all that week at the Beast Market, of animals that had been fattening
all summer and autumn in the countryside and were ready for slaughter
just before winter began. Pieter had gone every day to the sales.

The afternoon after Maria Thins and I spoke I slipped out to look for
him at the market, just around the corner from the Oude Langendijck.
It was quieter there in the afternoon than in the morning, when the
auctions took place. By now many of the beasts had been driven away by
their new owners, and men stood about under the plane trees that lined
the square, counting their money and discussing the deals that had
been made. The leaves on the trees had turned yellow and fallen to
mingle with the dung and urine I could smell long before I reached the
market.

Pieter the son was sitting with another man outside one of the taverns
on the square, a tankard of beer in front of him. Deep in
conversation, he did not see me as I stood silently near his table. It
was his companion who looked up, then nudged Pieter.



"I would like to speak to you for a moment," I said quickly, before
Pieter had a chance even to look surprised.

His companion immediately jumped up and offered me his chair.

"Could we walk?" I gestured to the square.

"Of course," Pieter said. He nodded to his friend and followed me
across the street. From his expression it was not clear whether or not
he was pleased to see me.

"How were the auctions today?" I asked awkwardly. I was never good at
making everyday talk.

Pieter shrugged. He took my elbow to steer me around a pile of dung,
then dropped his hand.

I gave up. "There has been gossip about me in the market," I said
bluntly.

"There is gossip about everyone at one time or another," he replied
neutrally.

"It's not true what they say. I'm not going to be in a painting with
van Ruijven."

"Van Ruijven likes you. My father told me."

"But I'm not going to be in a painting with him."

"He is very powerful."

"You must believe me, Pieter."

"He is very powerful," he repeated, "and you are but a maid. Who do
you think will win that round of cards?"

"You think I will become like the maid in the red dress."

"Only if you drink his wine." Pieter gazed at me levelly.

"My master does not want to paint me with van Ruijven," I said
reluctantly after a moment. I had not wanted to mention him.

"That's good. I don't want him to paint you either."

I stopped and closed my eyes. The close animal smell was beginning to
make me feel faint.

"You're getting caught where you should not be, Griet," Pieter said
more kindly. "Theirs is not your world."

I opened my eyes and took a step back from him. "I came here to
explain that the rumor is false, not to be accused by you. Now I'm
sorry I bothered."

"Don't be. I do believe you." He sighed. "But you have little power
over what happens to you. Surely you can see that?"

When I did not answer he added, "If your master did want to paint a
picture of you and van Ruijven, do you really think you could say no?"

It was a question I had asked myself but found no answer to. "Thank
you for reminding me of how helpless I am," I replied tartly.

"You wouldn't be, with me. We would run our own business, earn our own
money, rule our own lives. Isn't that what you want?"

I looked at him, at his bright blue eyes, his yellow curls, his eager
face. I was a fool even to hesitate.

"I didn't come here to talk about this. I'm too young yet." I used the
old excuse. Someday I would be too old to use it.

"I never know what you're thinking, Griet," he tried again. "You're so
calm and quiet, you never say. But there are things inside you. I see
them sometimes, hiding in your eyes."

I smoothed my cap, checking with my fingers for stray hairs. "All I
mean to say is that there is no painting," I declared, ignoring what
he had just said.  "Maria Thins has promised me. But you're not to
tell anyone. If they speak to you of me in the market, say nothing.
Don't try to defend me. Otherwise van Ruijven may hear and your words
will work against us."

Pieter nodded unhappily and kicked at a bit of dirty straw.

He will not always be so reasonable, I thought. One day he will give
up.

To reward him for his reasonableness, I let him take me into a space
between two houses off the Beast Market and run his hands down my
body, cupping them where there were curves. I tried to take pleasure
in it, but I was still feeling sick from the animal smell.

Whatever I said to Pieter the son, I myself did not feel reassured by
Maria Thins' promise to keep me out of the painting. She was a
formidable woman, astute in business, certain of her place, but she
was not van Ruijven. I did not see how they could refuse him what he
wanted. He had wanted a painting of his wife looking directly at the
painter, and my master had made it. He had wanted a painting of the
maid in the red dress, and had got that. If he wanted me, why should
he not get me?

***


One day three men I had not seen before came with a harpsichord tied
securely in a cart. A boy followed them carrying a bass viol that was
bigger than he.  They were not van Ruijven's instruments, but from one
of his relations who was fond of music. The whole house gathered to
watch the men struggle with the harpsichord on the steep stairs.
Cornelia stood right at the bottom--if they were to drop the instrument
it would fall directly on her. I wanted to reach out and pull her
back, and if it had been one of the other children I would not have
hesitated. Instead I remained where I was. It was Catharina who
finally insisted that she move to a safer spot.

When they got it up the stairs they took it to the studio, my master
supervising them. After the men left, he called down to Catharina.
Maria Thins followed her up. A moment later we heard the sound of the
harpsichord being played.  The girls sat on the stairs while Tanneke
and I stood in the hallway, listening.

"Is that the mistress playing? Or your mistress?" I asked Tanneke. It
seemed so unlike either of them that I thought perhaps he was playing
and simply wanted Catharina to be his audience.

"It's the young mistress, of course," Tanneke hissed. "Why would he
have asked her up otherwise? She's very good, is the young mistress.
She played when she was a girl. But her father kept their harpsichord
when he and my mistress separated. Have you never heard young mistress
complain about not being able to afford an instrument?"

"No." I thought for a moment. "Do you think he will paint her? For
this painting with van Ruijven?" Tanneke must have heard the market
gossip but had said nothing of it to me.

"Oh, the master never paints her. She can't sit still!"

Over the next few days he moved a table and chairs into the setting,
and lifted the harpsichord's lid, which was painted with a landscape
of rocks and trees and sky. He spread a table rug on the table in the
foreground, and set the bass viol under it.

One day Maria Thins called me to the Crucifixion room. "Now, girl,"
she said, "this afternoon I want you to go on some errands for me. To
the apothecary's for some elder flowers and hyssop--Franciscus has a
cough now that it's cold again. And then to Old Mary the spinner for
some wool, just enough for a collar for Aleydis. Did you notice hers
is unravelling?" She paused, as if calculating how long it would take
me to get from place to place. "And then go to Jan Mayer's house to
ask when his brother is expected in Delft. He lives by the Rietveld
Tower. That's near your parents, isn't it? You may stop in and visit
them."

Maria Thins had never allowed me to see my parents apart from Sundays.
Then I guessed. "Is van Ruijven coming today, madam?"

"Don't let him see you," she answered grimly. "It's best if you're not
here at all. Then if he asks for you we can say you're out."

For a moment I wanted to laugh. Van Ruijven had us all--even Maria
Thins-- running like rabbits before dogs.

My mother was surprised to see me that afternoon. Luckily a neighbor
was visiting and she could not question me closely. My father was not
so interested. He had changed much since I'd left home, since Agnes
had died.  He was no longer so curious about the world outside his
street, rarely asking me about the goings-on at the Oude Langendijck
or in the market. Only the paintings still interested him.

"Mother," I announced as we sat by the fire, "my master is beginning
the painting that you were asking about. Van Ruijven has come over and
he is setting it up today. Everyone who is to be in the painting is
there now."

Our neighbor, a bright-eyed old woman who loved market talk, gazed at
me as if I had just set a roast capon in front of her. My mother
frowned--she knew what I was doing.

There, I thought. That will take care of the rumors.


***


He was not himself that evening. I heard him snap at Maria Thins at
supper, and he went out later and came back smelling of the tavern. I
was climbing the stairs to bed when he came in. He looked up at me,
his face tired and red. His expression was not angry, but weary, as of
a man who has just seen all the wood he must chop, or a maid faced
with a mountain of laundry.

The next morning the studio gave few clues about what had happened the
afternoon before. Two chairs had been placed, one at the harpsichord,
the other with its back to the painter. There was a lute on the chair,
and a violin on the table to the left. The bass viol still lay in the
shadows under the table. It was hard to tell from the arrangement how
many people were to be in the painting.

Later Maertge told me that van Ruijven had come with his sister and
one of his daughters.

"How old is the daughter?" I could not help asking.

"Seventeen, I think."

My age.

They came around again a few days later. Maria Thins sent me on more
errands and told me to amuse myself elsewhere for the morning. I
wanted to remind her that I could not stay away every day they came to
be painted--it was getting too cold to idle in the streets, and there
was too much work to do.  But I did not say anything. I could not
explain it, but I felt something was to change soon. I just did not
know how.

I could not go to my parents again--they would think something was
wrong, and explaining otherwise would make them believe even worse
things were happening. Instead I went to Frans' factory. I had not
seen him since he had asked me about the valuables in the house. His
questions had angered me and I had made no effort to visit him.

The woman at the gate did not recognize me. When I asked to see Frans
she shrugged and stepped aside, disappearing without showing me where
to go. I walked into a low building where boys Frans' age sat on
benches at long tables, painting tiles. They were working on simple
designs, with nothing of the graceful style of my father's tiles. Many
were not even painting the main


figures, but only the flourishes in the corners of the tiles, the
leaves and curlicues, leaving a blank center for a more skilled master
to fill.

When they saw me a chorus of high whistles erupted that made me want
to stop my ears. I went up to the nearest boy and asked him where my
brother was. He turned red and ducked his head. Though I was a welcome
distraction, no one would answer my question.

I found another building, smaller and hotter, housing the kiln. Frans
was there alone, with his shirt off and the sweat pouring from him and
a grim look on his face. The muscles in his arms and chest had grown.
He was becoming a man.

He had tied quilted material around his forearms and hands that made
him look clumsy, but when he pulled trays of tiles in and out of the
kiln, he skillfully wielded the flat sheets so that he did not burn
himself. I was afraid to call to him because he would be startled and
might drop a tray. But he saw me before I spoke, and immediately set
down the tray he held.

"Griet, what are you doing here? Is something wrong with Mother or
Father?"

"No, no, they're fine. I've just come to visit."

"Oh." Frans pulled the cloths from his arms, wiped his face with a rag
and gulped beer from a mug. He leaned against the wall and rolled his
shoulders the way men do who have finished unloading cargo from a
canal boat and are easing and stretching their muscles. I had never
seen him make such a gesture before.

"Are you still working the kiln? They have not moved you to something
else?  Glazing, or painting like those boys in the other building?"

Frans shrugged.

"But those boys are the same age as you. Shouldn't you be--" I could
not finish my sentence when I saw the look on his face.

"It's punishment," he said in a low voice.

"Why? Punishment for what?"

Frans did not answer.


"Frans, you must tell me or I'll tell our parents you're in trouble."

"I'm not in trouble," he said quickly. "I made the owner angry, is
all."

"How?"

"I did something his wife didn't like."

"What did you do?"

Frans hesitated. "It was she who started it," he said softly. "She
showed her interest, you see. But when I showed mine she told her
husband. He didn't throw me out because he's a friend of Father's. So
I'm on the kiln until his humor improves."

"Frans! How could you be so stupid? You know she's not for the likes
of you.  To endanger your place here for something like that?"

"You don't understand what it's like," Frans muttered. "Working here,
it's exhausting, it's boring. It was something to think about, that's
all. You have no right to judge, you with your butcher that you'll
marry and have a fine life with. Easy for you to say what my life
should be like when all I can see are endless tiles and long days. Why
shouldn't I admire a pretty face when I see one?"

I wanted to protest, to tell him that I understood. At night I
sometimes dreamed of piles of laundry that never got smaller no matter
how much I scrubbed and boiled and ironed.

"Was she the woman at the gate?" I asked instead.

Frans shrugged and drank more beer. I pictured her sour expression and
wondered how such a face could ever tempt him.

"Why are you here, anyway?" he asked. "Shouldn't you be at Papists'
Corner?"

I had prepared an excuse for why I had come, that an errand had taken
me to that part of Delft. But I felt so sorry for my brother that I
found myself telling him about van Ruijven and the painting. It was a
relief to confide in him.

***


He listened carefully. When I finished he declared, "You see, we're
not so different, with the attentions we've had from those above us."

"But I haven't responded to van Ruijven, and have no intention to."

"I didn't mean van Ruijven," Frans said, his look suddenly sly. "No,
not him. I meant your master."

"What about my master?" I cried.

Frans smiled. "Now, Griet, don't work yourself into a state."

"Stop that! What are you suggesting? He has never--"

"He doesn't have to. It's clear from your face. You want him. You can
hide it from our parents and your butcher man, but you can't hide it
from me. I know you better than that."

He did. He did know me better.

I opened my mouth but no words came out.

***


Although it was December, and cold, I walked so fast and fretted so
much over Frans that I got back to Papists' Corner long before I
should have. I grew hot and began to loosen my shawls to cool my face.
As I was walking up the Oude Langendijck I saw van Ruijven and my
master coming toward me. I bowed my head and crossed over so that I
would pass by my master's side rather than van Ruijven's but the
crossing only drew van Ruijven's attention to me. He stopped, forcing
my master to halt with him.

"You--the wide-eyed maid," he called, turning towards me. "They told me
you were out. I think you've been avoiding me. What's your name, my
girl?"

"Griet, sir." I kept my eyes fixed on my master's shoes. They were
shiny and black--Maertge had polished them under my guidance earlier
that day.

"Well, Griet, have you been avoiding me?"

***


"Oh no, sir. I've been on errands." I held up a pail of things I had
been to get for Maria Thins before I visited Frans.

"I hope I will see more of you, then."

"Yes, sir." Two women were standing behind the men. I peeked at their
faces and guessed they were the daughter and sister who were sitting
for the painting. The daughter was staring at me.

"You have not forgotten your promise, I hope," van Ruijven said to my
master.

My master jerked his head like a puppet. "No," he replied after a
moment.

"Good, I expect you'll want to make a start on that before you ask us
to come again." Van Ruijven's smile made me shiver.

There was a long silence. I glanced at my master. He was struggling to
maintain a calm expression, but I knew he was angry.

"Yes," he said at last, his eyes on the house opposite. He did not
look at me.

I did not understand that conversation in the street, but I knew it
was to do with me. The next day I discovered how.

In the morning he asked me to come up in the afternoon. I assumed he
wanted me to work with the colors, that he was starting the concert
painting. When I got to the studio he was not there. I went straight
to the attic. The grinding table was clear--nothing had been laid out
for me. I climbed back down the ladder, feeling foolish.

He had come in and was standing in the studio, looking out a window.

"Take a seat, please, Griet," he said, his back to me.

I sat in the chair by the harpsichord. I did not touch it--I had never
touched an instrument except to clean it. As I waited I studied the
paintings he had hung on the back wall that would form part of the
concert painting. There was a landscape on the left, and on the right
a picture of three people--a woman playing a lute, wearing a dress that
revealed much of her bosom, a gentleman with his arm around her, and
an old woman. The man was buying the young


woman's favors, the old woman reaching to take the coin he held out.
Maria Thins owned the painting and had told me it was called The
Procuress.

"Not that chair." He had turned from the window. "That is where van
Ruijven's daughter sits."

Where I would have sat, I thought, if I were to be in the painting.

He got another of the lion-head chairs and set it close to his easel
but sideways so it faced the window. "Sit here."

"What do you want, sir?" I asked, sitting. I was puzzled--we never sat
together. I shivered, although I was not cold.

"Don't talk." He opened a shutter so that the light fell directly on
my face.  "Look out the window." He sat down in his chair by the
easel.

I gazed at the New Church tower and swallowed. I could feel my jaw
tightening and my eyes widening.

"Now look at me."

I turned my head and looked at him over my left shoulder.

His eyes locked with mine. I could think of nothing except how their
grey was like the inside of an oyster shell.

He seemed to be waiting for something. My face began to strain with
the fear that I was not giving him what he wanted.

"Griet," he said softly. It was all he had to say. My eyes filled with
tears I did not shed. I knew now.

"Yes. Don't move."

He was going to paint me.

***


				  1666

***

"You smell of linseed oil." My father spoke in a baffled tone. He did
not believe that simply cleaning a painter's studio would make the
smell linger on my clothes, my skin, my hair.  He was right. It was as
if he guessed that I now slept with the oil in my room, that I sat for
hours being painted and absorbing the scent. He guessed and yet he
could not say. His blindness took away his confidence so that he did
not trust the thoughts in his mind.

A year before I might have tried to help him, suggest what he was
thinking, humor him into speaking his mind. Now, however, I simply
watched him struggle silently, like a beetle that has fallen onto its
back and cannot turn itself over.

My mother had also guessed, though she did not know what she had
guessed.  Sometimes I could not meet her eye. When I did her look was
a puzzle of anger held back, of curiosity, of hurt. She was trying to
understand what had happened to her daughter.

I had grown used to the smell of linseed oil. I even kept a small
bottle of it by my bed. In the mornings when I was getting dressed I
held it up to the window to admire the color, which was like lemon
juice with a drop of lead-tin yellow in it.

I wear that color now, I wanted to say. He is painting me in that
color.

Instead, to take my father's mind off the smell, I described the other
painting my master was working on. "A young woman sits at a
harpsichord, playing.  She is wearing a yellow and black bodice--the
same the baker's daughter wore for her painting--a white satin skirt
and white ribbons in her hair.

Standing in the curve of the harpsichord is another woman, who is
holding music and singing. She wears a green, fur-trimmed housecoat
and a blue dress.  In between the women is a man sitting with his back
to us--"

"Van Ruijven," my father interrupted.

"Yes, van Ruijven. All that can be seen of him is his back, his hair,
and one hand on the neck of a lute."

"He plays the lute badly," my father added eagerly.

"Very badly. That's why his back is to us--so we won't see that he
can't even hold his lute properly."

My father chuckled, his good mood restored. He was always pleased to
hear that a rich man could be a poor musician.

It was not always so easy to bring him back into good humor. Sundays
had become so uncomfortable with my parents that I began to welcome
those times when Pieter the son ate with us. He must have noted the
troubled looks my mother gave me, my father's querulous comments, the
awkward silences so unexpected between parent and child. He never said
anything about them, never winced or stared or became tongue-tied
himself. Instead he gently teased my father, flattered my mother,
smiled at me.

Pieter did not ask why I smelled of linseed oil. He did not seem to
worry about what I might be hiding. He had decided to trust me.

He was a good man.

I could not help it, though--I always looked to see if there was blood
under his fingernails.

He should soak them in salted water, I thought. One day I will tell
him so.

He was a good man, but he was becoming impatient. He did not say so,
but sometimes on Sundays in the alley off the Rietveld Canal, I could
feel the impatience in his hands. He would grip my thighs harder than
he needed, press his palm into my back so that I was glued in his
groin and would know its bulge, even under many layers of cloth. It
was so cold that we did not touch each other's skin--only the bumps and
textures of wool, the rough outlines of our limbs.

Pieter's touch did not always repel me. Sometimes, if I looked over
his shoulder at the sky, and found the colors besides white in a
cloud, or thought of grinding lead white or massicot, my breasts and
belly tingled, and I pressed against him. He was always pleased when I
responded. He did not notice that I avoided looking at his face and
hands.

That Sunday of the linseed oil, when my father and mother looked so
puzzled and unhappy, Pieter led me to the alley later. There he began
squeezing my breasts and pulling at their nipples through the cloth of
my dress. Then he stopped suddenly, gave me a sly look, and ran his
hands over my shoulders and up my neck. Before I could stop him his
hands were up under my cap and tangled in my hair.

I held my cap down with both hands. "No!"

Pieter smiled at me, his eyes glazed as if he had looked too long at
the sun. He had managed to pull loose a strand of my hair, and tugged
it now with his fingers. "Some day soon, Griet, I will see all of
this. You will not always be a secret to me." He let a hand drop to
the lower curve of my belly and pushed against me. "You will be
eighteen next month. I'll speak to your father then."

I stepped back from him--I felt as if I were in a hot, dark room and
could not breathe. "I am still so young. Too young for that."

Pieter shrugged. "Not everyone waits until they're older. And your
family needs me." It was the first time he had referred to my parents'
poverty, and their dependence on him--their dependence which became my
dependence as well. Because of it they were content to take the gifts
of meat and have me stand in an alley with him on a Sunday.

I frowned. I did not like being reminded of his power over us.

Pieter sensed that he should not have said anything. To make amends he
tucked the strand of hair back under my cap, then touched my cheek.
"I'll make you happy, Griet," he said. "I will."

After he left I walked along the canal, despite the cold. The ice had
been broken so that boats could get through, but a thin layer had
formed again on the surface. When we were children Frans and Agnes and
I would throw stones to shatter the thin ice until every sliver had
disappeared under water. It seemed a long time ago.



***


A month before he had asked me to come up to the studio.

"I will be in the attic," I announced to the room that afternoon.

Tanneke did not look up from her sewing. "Put some more wood on the
fire before you go," she ordered.

The girls were working on their lace, overseen by Maertge and Maria
Thins.  Lisbeth had patience and nimble fingers, and produced good
work, but Aleydis was still too young to manage the delicate weaving,
and Cornelia too impatient. The cat sat at Cornelia's feet by the
fire, and occasionally the girl reached down and dangled a bit of
thread for the creature to paw at.  Eventually, she probably hoped,
the cat would tear its claws through her work and ruin it.

After feeding the fire I stepped around Johannes, who was playing with
a top on the cold kitchen tiles. As I left he spun it wildly, and it
hopped straight into the fire. He began to cry while Cornelia shrieked
with laughter and Maertge tried to haul the toy from the flames with a
pair of tongs.

"Hush, you'll wake Catharina and Franciscus," Maria Thins warned the
children. They did not hear her.

I crept out, relieved to escape the noise, no matter how cold it would
be in the studio.

The studio door was shut. As I approached it I pressed my lips
together, smoothed my eyebrows, and ran my fingers down the sides of
my cheeks to my chin, as if I were testing an apple to see if it was
firm. I hesitated in front of the heavy wooden door, then knocked
softly. There was no answer, though I knew he must be there--he was
expecting me.

It was the first day of the new year. He had painted the ground layer
of my painting almost a month before, but nothing since--no reddish
marks to indicate the shapes, no false colors, no overlaid colors, no
highlights. The canvas was a blank yellowish white. I saw it every
morning as I cleaned.

I knocked louder.

***


When the door opened he was frowning, his eyes not catching mine.
"Don't knock, Griet, just come in quietly," he said, turning away and
going back to the easel, where the blank canvas sat waiting for its
colors.

I closed the door softly behind me, blotting out the noise of the
children downstairs, and stepped to the middle of the room. Now that
the moment had come at last I was surprisingly calm. "You wanted me,
sir."

"Yes. Stand over there." He gestured to the corner where he had
painted the other women. The table he was using for the concert
painting was set there, but he had cleared away the musical
instruments. He handed me a letter.  "Read that," he said.

I unfolded the sheet of paper and bowed my head over it, worried that
he would discover I was only pretending to read an unfamiliar hand.

Nothing was written on the paper.

I looked up to tell him so, but stopped. With him it was often better
to say nothing. I bowed my head again over the letter.

"Try this instead," he suggested, handing me a book. It was bound in
worn leather and the spine was broken in several places. I opened it
at random and studied a page. I did not recognize any of the words.

He had me sit with the book, then stand holding it while looking at
him. He took away the book, handed me the white jug with the pewter
top and had me pretend to pour a glass of wine. He asked me to stand
and simply look out the window. All the while he seemed perplexed, as
if someone had told him a story and he couldn't recall the ending.

"It is the clothes," he murmured. "That is the problem."

I understood. He was having me do things a lady would do, but I was
wearing a maid's clothes. I thought of the yellow mantle and the
yellow and black bodice, and wondered which he would ask me to wear.
Instead of being excited by the idea, though, I felt uneasy. It was
not just that it would be impossible to hide from Catharina that I was
wearing her clothes. I did not feel right holding books and letters,
pouring myself wine, doing things I never did.  As much as I wanted to
feel the soft fur of the mantle around my neck, it was not what I
normally wore.



"Sir," I spoke finally, "perhaps you should have me do other things.
Things that a maid does."

"What does a maid do?" he asked softly, folding his arms and raising
his eyebrows.

I had to wait a moment before I could answer--my jaw was trembling. I
thought of Pieter and me in the alley and swallowed. "Sewing," I
replied.  "Mopping and sweeping. Carrying water. Washing sheets.
Cutting bread.  Polishing windowpanes."

"You would like me to paint you with your mop?"

"It's not for me to say, sir. It is not my painting."

He frowned. "No, it is not yours." He sounded as if he were speaking
to himself.

"I do not want you to paint me with my mop." I said it without knowing
that I would.

"No. No, you're right, Griet. I would not paint you with a mop in your
hand."

"But I cannot wear your wife's clothes."

There was a long silence. "No, I expect not," he said. "But I will not
paint you as a maid."

"What, then, sir?"

"I will paint you as I first saw you, Griet. Just you."

He set a chair near his easel, facing the middle window, and I sat
down. I knew it was to be my place. He was going to find the pose he
had put me in a month before, when he had decided to paint me.

"Look out the window," he said.

I looked out at the grey winter day and, remembering when I stood in
for the baker's daughter, tried not to see anything but to let my
thoughts become quiet. It was hard because I was thinking of him, and
of me sitting in front of him.

The New Church bell struck twice.

"Now turn your head very slowly towards me. No, not your shoulders.
Keep your body turned towards the window. Move only your head. Slow,
slow.  Stop. A little more, so that--stop. Now sit still."

I sat still.

At first I could not meet his eyes. When I did it was like sitting
close to a fire that suddenly blazes up. Instead I studied his firm
chin, his thin lips.

"Griet, you are not looking at me."

I forced my gaze up to his eyes. Again I felt as if I were burning,
but I endured it--he wanted me to.

Soon it became easier to keep my eyes on his. He looked at me as if he
were not seeing me, but someone else, or something else--as if he were
looking at a painting.

He is looking at the light that falls on my face, I thought, not at my
face itself.  That is the difference.

It was almost as if I were not there. Once I felt this I was able to
relax a little.  As he was not seeing me, I did not see him. My mind
began to wander--over the jugged hare we had eaten for dinner, the lace
collar Lisbeth had given me, a story Pieter the son had told me the
day before. After that I thought of nothing. Twice he got up to change
the position of one of the shutters. He went to his cupboard several
times to choose different brushes and colors. I viewed his movements
as if I were standing in the street, looking in through the window.

The church bell struck three times. I blinked. I had not felt so much
time pass.  It was as if I had fallen under a spell.

I looked at him--his eyes were with me now. He was looking at me. As we
gazed at each other a ripple of heat passed through my body. I kept my
eyes on his, though, until at last he looked away and cleared his
throat.

"That will be all, Griet. There is some bone for you to grind
upstairs."

I nodded and slipped from the room, my heart pounding. He was painting
me.

***


" Pull your cap back from your face," he said one day.

"Back from my face, sir?" I repeated dumbly, and regretted it. He
preferred me not to speak, but to do as he said. If I did speak, I
should say something worth the words.

He did not answer. I pulled the side of my cap that was closest to him
back from my cheek. The starched tip grazed my neck.

"More," he said. "I want to see the line of your cheek."

I hesitated, then pulled it back further. His eyes moved down my
cheek.

"Show me your ear."

I did not want to. I had no choice.

I felt under the cap to make sure no hair was loose, tucking a few
strands behind my ear. Then I pulled it back to reveal the lower part
of my ear.

The look on his face was like a sigh, though he did not make a sound.
I caught a noise in my own throat and pushed it down so that it would
not escape.

"Your cap," he said. "Take it off."

"No, sir."

"No?"

"Please do not ask me to, sir." I let the cloth of the cap drop so
that my ear and cheek were covered again. I looked at the floor, the
grey and white tiles extending away from me, clean and straight.

"You do not want to bare your head?"

"No."

"Yet you do not want to be painted as a maid, with your mop and your
cap, nor as a lady, with satin and fur and dressed hair."

I did not answer. I could not show him my hair. I was not the sort of
girl who left her head bare.

He shifted in his chair, then got up. I heard him go into the
storeroom. When he returned, his arms were full of cloth, which he
dropped in my lap.

"Well, Griet, see what you can do with this. Find something here to
wrap your head in, so that you are neither a lady nor a maid." I could
not tell if he was angry or amused. He left the room, shutting the
door behind him.

I sorted through the cloth. There were three caps, all too fine for
me, and too small to cover my head fully. There were pieces of cloth,
left over from dresses and jackets Catharina had made, in yellows and
browns, blues and greys.

I did not know what to do. I looked around as if I would find an
answer in the studio. My eyes fell on the painting of The
Procuress--the young woman's head was bare, her hair held back with
ribbons, but the old woman wore a piece of cloth wrapped around her
head, crisscrossing in and out of itself.  Perhaps that is what he
wants, I thought. Perhaps that is what women who are neither ladies
nor maids nor the other do with their hair.

I chose a piece of brown cloth and took it into the storeroom, where
there was a mirror. I removed my cap and wound the cloth around my
head as best I could, checking the painting to try to imitate the old
woman's. I looked very peculiar.

I should let him paint me with a mop, I thought. Pride has made me
vain.

When he returned and saw what I had done, he laughed. I had not heard
him laugh often--sometimes with the children, once with van
Leeuwenhoek. I frowned. I did not like being laughed at.

"I have only done what you asked, sir," I muttered.

He stopped chuckling. "You're right, Griet. I'm sorry. And your face,
now that I can see more of it, it is--" He stopped, never finishing his
sentence. I always wondered what he would have said.

He turned to the pile of cloth I had left on my chair. "Why did you
choose brown," he asked, "when there are other colors?"



I did not want to speak of maids and ladies again. I did not want to
remind him that blues and yellows were ladies' colors. "Brown is the
color I usually wear," I said simply.

He seemed to guess what I was thinking. "Tanneke wore blue and yellow
when I painted her some years ago," he countered.

"I am not Tanneke, sir."

"No, that you certainly are not." He pulled out a long, narrow band of
blue cloth. "Nonetheless, I want you to try this."

I studied it. "That is not enough cloth to cover my head."

"Use this as well, then." He picked up a piece of yellow cloth that
had a border of the same blue and held it out to me.

Reluctantly I took the two pieces of cloth back to the storeroom and
tried again in front of the mirror. I tied the blue cloth over my
forehead, with the yellow piece wound round and round, covering the
crown of my head. I tucked the end into a fold at the side of my head,
adjusted folds here and there, smoothed the blue cloth round my head,
and stepped back into the studio.

He was looking at a book and did not notice as I slipped into my
chair. I arranged myself as I had been sitting before. As I turned my
head to look over my left shoulder, he glanced up. At the same time
the end of the yellow cloth came loose and fell over my shoulder.

"Oh," I breathed, afraid that the cloth would fall from my head and
reveal all my hair. But it held--only the end of the yellow cloth
dangled free. My hair remained hidden.

"Yes," he said then. "That is it, Griet. Yes."

***


He would not let me see the painting. He set it on a second easel,
angled away from the door, and told me not to look at it. I promised
not to, but some nights I lay in bed and thought about wrapping my
blanket around me and stealing downstairs to see it. He would never
know.

***


But he would guess. I did not think I could sit with him looking at me
day after day without guessing that I had looked at the painting. I
could not hide things from him. I did not want to.

I was reluctant, too, to discover how it was that he saw me. It was
better to leave that a mystery.

The colors he asked me to mix gave no clues as to what he was doing.
Black, ocher, lead white, lead-tin yellow, ultramarine, red lake--they
were all colors I had worked with before, and they could as easily
have been used for the concert painting.

It was unusual for him to work on two paintings at once. Although he
did not like switching back and forth between the two, it did make it
easier to hide from others that he was painting me. A few people knew.
Van Ruijven knew--I was sure it was at his request that my master was
making the painting. My master must have agreed to paint me alone so
that he would not have to paint me with van Ruijven. Van Ruijven would
own the painting of me.

I was not pleased by this thought. Nor, I believed, was my master.

Maria Thins knew about the painting as well. It was she who probably
made the arrangement with van Ruijven. And besides, she could still go
in and out of the studio as she liked, and could look at the painting,
as I was not allowed to.  Sometimes she looked at me sideways with a
curious expression she could not hide.

I suspected Cornelia knew about the painting. I caught her one day
where she should not be, on the stairs leading to the studio. She
would not say why she was there when I asked her, and I let her go
rather than bring her to Maria Thins or Catharina. I did not dare stir
things up, not while he was painting me.

Van Leeuwenhoek knew about the painting. One day he brought his camera
obscura and set it up so they could look at me. He did not seem
surprised to see me sitting in my chair--my master must have warned
him. He did glance at my unusual head cloth, but did not comment.

They took turns using the camera. I had learned to sit without moving
or thinking, and without being distracted by his gaze. It was harder,
though, with the black box pointed at me. With no eyes, no face, no
body turned towards me, only a box and a black robe covering a humped
back, I became uneasy. I could no longer be sure of how they were
looking at me.

I could not deny, however, that it was exciting to be studied so
intently by two gentlemen, even if I could not see their faces.

My master left the room to find a soft cloth to polish the lens. Van
Leeuwenhoek waited until his tread could be heard on the stairs, then
said softly, "You watch out for yourself, my dear."

"What do you mean, sir?"

"You must know that he's painting you to satisfy van Ruijven. Van
Ruijven's interest in you has made your master protective of you."

I nodded, secretly pleased to hear what I had suspected.

"Do not get caught in their battle. You could be hurt."

I was still holding the position I had assumed for the painting. Now
my shoulders twitched of their own accord, as if I were shaking off a
shawl. "I do not think he would ever hurt me, sir."

"Tell me, my dear, how much do you know of men?"

I blushed deeply and turned my head away. I was thinking of being in
the alley with Pieter the son.

"You see, competition makes men possessive. He is interested in you in
part because van Ruijven is."

I did not answer.

"He is an exceptional man," van Leeuwenhoek continued. "His eyes are
worth a room full of gold. But sometimes he sees the world only as he
wants it to be, not as it is. He does not understand the consequences
for others of his point of view. He thinks only of himself and his
work, not of you. You must take care then--" He stopped. My master's
footsteps were on the stairs.

"Take care to do what, sir?" I whispered.

"Take care to remain yourself."

I lifted my chin to him. "To remain a maid, sir?"


"That is not what I mean. The women in his paintings--he traps them in
his world. You can get lost there."

My master came into the room. "Griet, you have moved," he said.

"I am sorry, sir." I took up my position once more.

***


Catharina was six months pregnant when he began the painting of me.
She was large already, and moved slowly, leaning against walls,
grabbing the back of chairs, sinking heavily into one with a sigh. I
was surprised by how hard she made carrying a child seem, given that
she had done so several times already.  Although she did not complain
aloud, once she was big she made every movement seem like a punishment
she was being forced to bear. I had not noticed this when she was
carrying Franciscus, when I was new to the house and could barely see
beyond the pile of laundry waiting for me each morning.

As she grew heavier Catharina became more and more absorbed in
herself.  She still looked after the children, with Maertge's help.
She still concerned herself with the housekeeping, and gave Tanneke
and me orders. She still shopped for the house with Maria Thins. But
part of her was elsewhere, with the baby inside. Her harsh manner was
rare now, and less deliberate. She slowed down, and though she was
clumsy she broke fewer things.

I worried about her discovering the painting of me. Luckily the stairs
to the studio were becoming awkward for her to climb, so that she was
unlikely to fling open the studio door and discover me in my chair,
him at his easel. And because it was winter she preferred to sit by
the fire with the children and Tanneke and Maria Thins, or doze under
a mound of blankets and furs.

The real danger was that she would find out from van Ruijven. Of the
people who knew of the painting, he was the worst at keeping a secret.
He came to the house regularly to sit for the concert painting. Maria
Thins no longer sent me on errands or told me to make myself scarce
when he came. It would have been impractical--there were only so many
errands I could run. And she must have thought he would be satisfied
with the promise of a painting, and would leave me alone.

He did not. Sometimes he sought me out, while I was washing or ironing
clothes in the washing kitchen, or working with Tanneke in the cooking
kitchen. It was not so bad when others were around--when Maertge was
with me, or Tanneke, or even Aleydis, he simply called out, "Hello, my
girl," in his

honeyed voice and left me in peace. If I was alone, however, as I
often was in the courtyard, hanging up laundry so it could catch a few
minutes of pale winter sunlight, he would step into the enclosed
space, and behind a sheet I had just hung, or one of my master's
shirts, he would touch me. I pushed him away as politely as a maid can
a gentleman. Nonetheless he managed to become familiar with the shape
of my breasts and thighs under my clothes. He said things to me that I
tried to forget, words I would never repeat to anyone else.

Van Ruijven always visited Catharina for a few minutes after sitting
in the studio, his daughter and sister waiting patiently for him to
finish gossiping and flirting. Although Maria Thins had told him not
to say anything to Catharina about the painting, he was not a man to
keep secrets quietly. He was very pleased that he was to have the
painting of me, and he sometimes dropped hints about it to Catharina.

One day as I was mopping the hallway I overheard him say to her, "Who
would you have your husband paint, if he could paint anyone in the
world?"

"Oh, I don't think about such things," she laughed in reply. "He
paints what he paints."

"I don't know about that." Van Ruijven worked so hard to sound sly
that even Catharina could not miss the hint.

"What do you mean?" she demanded.

"Nothing, nothing. But you should ask him for a painting. He might not
say no. He could paint one of the children--Maertge, perhaps. Or your
own lovely self."

Catharina was silent. From the way van Ruijven quickly changed the
subject he must have realized he had said something that upset her.

Another time when she asked if he enjoyed sitting for the painting he
replied, "Not as much as I would if I had a pretty girl to sit with
me. But soon enough I'll have her anyway, and that will have to do,
for now."

Catharina let this remark pass, as she would not have done a few
months before. But then, perhaps it did not sound so suspicious to her
since she knew nothing of the painting. I was horrified, though, and
repeated his words to Maria Thins.


"Have you been listening behind doors, girl?" the old woman asked.

"I--" I could not deny it.

Maria Thins smiled sourly. "It's about time I caught you doing things
maids are meant to do. Next you'll be stealing silver spoons."

I flinched. It was a harsh thing to say, especially after all the
trouble with Cornelia and the combs. I had no choice, though--I owed
Maria Thins a great deal. She must be allowed her cruel words.

"But you're right, van Ruijven's mouth is looser than a whore's
purse," she continued. "I will speak to him again."

Saying something to him, however, was of little use--it seemed to spur
him on even more to make suggestions to Catharina. Maria Thins took to
being in the room with her daughter when he visited so that she could
try to rein in his tongue.

I did not know what Catharina would do when she discovered the
painting of me. And she would, one day--if not in the house, then at
van Ruijven's, where she would be dining and look up and see me
staring at her from a wall.

***


He did not work on the painting of me every day. He had the concert to
paint as well, with or without van Ruijven and his women. He painted
around them when they were not there, or asked me to take the place of
one of the women--the girl sitting at the harpsichord, the woman
standing next to it singing from a sheet of paper. I did not wear
their clothes. He simply wanted a body there. Sometimes the two women
came without van Ruijven, and that was when he worked best. Van
Ruijven himself was a difficult model. I could hear him when I was
working in the attic. He could not sit still, and wanted to talk and
play his lute. My master was patient with him, as he would be with a
child, but sometimes I could hear a tone creep into his voice and knew
that he would go out that night to the tavern, returning with eyes
like glittering spoons.

I sat for him for the other painting three or four times a week, for
an hour or two each time. It was the part of the week I liked best,
with his eyes on only me for those hours. I did not mind that it was
not an easy pose to hold, that looking sideways for long periods of
time gave me headaches. I did not mind


when sometimes he had me move my head again and again so that the
yellow cloth swung around, so that he could paint me looking as if I
had just turned to face him. I did whatever he asked of me.

He was not happy, though. February passed and March arrived, with its
days of ice and sun, and he was not happy. He had been working on the
painting for almost two months, and though I had not seen it, I
thought it must be close to done. He was no longer having me mix
quantities of color for it, but used tiny amounts and made few
movements with his brushes as I sat. I had thought I understood how he
wanted me to be, but now I was not sure. Sometimes he simply sat and
looked at me as if he were waiting for me to do something.  Then he
was not like a painter, but like a man, and it was hard to look at
him.

One day he announced suddenly, as I was sitting in my chair, "This
will satisfy van Ruijven, but not me."

I did not know what to say. I could not help him if I had not seen the
painting.  "May I look at the painting, sir?"

He gazed at me curiously.

"Perhaps I can help," I added, then wished I had not. I was afraid I
had become too bold.

"All right," he said after a moment.

I got up and stood behind him. He did not turn round, but sat very
still. I could hear him breathing slowly and steadily.

The painting was like none of his others. It was just of me, of my
head and shoulders, with no tables or curtains, no windows or
powder-brushes to soften and distract. He had painted me with my eyes
wide, the light falling across my face but the left side of me in
shadow. I was wearing blue and yellow and brown. The cloth wound round
my head made me look not like myself, but like Griet from another
town, even from another country altogether. The background was black,
making me appear very much alone, although I was clearly looking at
someone. I seemed to be waiting for something I did not think would
ever happen.

He was right--the painting might satisfy van Ruijven, but something was
missing from it.



I knew before he did. When I saw what was needed--that point of
brightness he had used to catch the eye in other paintings--I shivered.
This will be the end, I thought.

I was right.

***


This time I did not try to help him as I had with the painting of van
Ruijven's wife writing a letter. I did not creep into the studio and
change things-- reposition the chair I sat in or open the shutters
wider. I did not wrap the blue and yellow cloth differently or hide
the top of my chemise. I did not bite my lips to make them redder, or
suck in my cheeks. I did not set out colors I thought he might use.

I simply sat for him, and ground and washed the colors he asked for.

He would find it for himself anyway.

It took longer than I had expected. I sat for him twice more before he
discovered what was missing. Each time I sat he painted with a
dissatisfied look on his face, and dismissed me early.

I waited.

Catharina herself gave him the answer. One afternoon Maertge and I
were polishing shoes in the washing kitchen while the other girls had
gathered in the great hall to watch their mother dress for a birth
feast. I heard Aleydis and Lisbeth squeal, and knew Catharina had
brought out her pearls, which the girls loved.

Then I heard his tread in the hallway, silence, then low voices. After
a moment he called out, "Griet, bring my wife a glass of wine."

I set the white jug and two glasses on a tray, in case he chose to
join her, and took them to the great hall. As I entered I bumped
against Cornelia, who had been standing in the doorway. I managed to
catch the jug, and the glasses clattered against my chest without
breaking. Cornelia smirked and stepped out of my way.

***



Catharina was sitting at the table with her powder-brush and jar, her
combs and jewelry box. She was wearing her pearls and her green silk
dress, altered to cover her belly. I placed a glass near her and
poured.

"Would you like some wine too, sir?" I asked, glancing up. He was
leaning against the cupboard that surrounded the bed, pressed against
the silk curtains, which I noticed for the first time were made of the
same cloth as Catharina's dress. He looked back and forth between
Catharina and me. On his face was his painter's look.

"Silly girl, you've spilled wine on me!" Catharina pushed away from
the table and brushed at her belly with her hand. A few drops of red
had splashed there.

"I'm sorry, madam. I'll get a damp cloth to sponge it."

"Oh, never mind. I can't bear to have you fussing about me. Just go."

I stole a look at him as I picked up the tray. His eyes were fixed on
his wife's pearl earring. As she turned her head to brush more powder
on her face the earring swung back and forth, caught in the light from
the front windows. It made us all look at her face, and reflected
light as her eyes did.

"I must go upstairs for a moment," he said to Catharina. "I won't be
long."

That is it, then, I thought. He has his answer.

When he asked me to come to the studio the next afternoon, I did not
feel excited as I usually did when I knew I was to sit for him. For
the first time I dreaded it. That morning the clothes I washed felt
particularly heavy and sodden, and my hands not strong enough to wring
them well. I moved slowly between the kitchen and the courtyard, and
sat down to rest more than once.  Maria Thins caught me sitting when
she came in for a copper pancake pan.  "What's the matter, girl? Are
you ill?" she asked.

I jumped up. "No, madam. Just a little tired."

"Tired, eh? That's no way for a maid to be, especially not in the
morning." She looked as if she did not believe me.

I plunged my hands into the cooling water and pulled out one of
Catharina's chemises. "Are there any errands you would like me to run
this afternoon, madam?"

"Errands? This afternoon? I don't think so. That's a funny thing to
ask if you're feeling tired." She narrowed her eyes. "You aren't in
trouble, are you, girl? Van Ruijven didn't catch you alone, did he?"

"No, madam." In fact he had, just two days before, but I had managed
to pull away from him.

"Has someone discovered you upstairs?" Maria Thins asked in a low
voice, jerking her head up to indicate the studio.

"No, madam." For a moment I was tempted to tell her about the earring.
Instead I said, "I ate something that did not agree with me, that is
all."

Maria Thins shrugged and turned away. She still did not believe me,
but had decided it did not matter.

That afternoon I plodded up the stairs, and paused before the studio
door. This would not be like other times when I sat for him. He was
going to ask me for something, and I was beholden to him.

I pushed open the door. He sat at his easel, studying the tip of one
of his brushes. When he looked up at me I saw something I had never
before seen in his face. He was nervous.

That was what gave me the courage to say what I said. I went to stand
by my chair and placed my hand on one of the lion heads. "Sir," I
began, gripping the hard, cool carving, "I cannot do it."

"Do what, Griet?" He was genuinely surprised.

"What you are going to ask me to do. I cannot wear it. Maids do not
wear pearls."

He stared at me for a long moment, then shook his head a few times.
"How unexpected you are. You always surprise me."

I ran my fingers around the lion's nose and mouth and up its muzzle to
its mane, smooth and knobbled. His eyes followed my fingers.

"You know," he murmured, "that the painting needs it, the light that
the pearl reflects. It won't be complete otherwise."


I did know. I had not looked at the painting long--it was too strange
seeing myself--but I had known immediately that it needed the pearl
earring.  Without it there were only my eyes, my mouth, the band of my
chemise, the dark space behind my ear, all separate. The earring would
bring them together.  It would complete the painting.

It would also put me on the street. I knew that he would not borrow an
earring from van Ruijven or van Leeuwenhoek or anyone else. He had
seen Catharina's pearl and that was what he would make me wear. He
used what he wanted for his paintings, without considering the result.
It was as van Leeuwenhoek had warned me.

When Catharina saw her earring in the painting she would explode.

I should have begged him not to ruin me.

"You are painting it for van Ruijven," I argued instead, "not for
yourself. Does it matter so much? You said yourself that he would be
satisfied with it."

His face hardened and I knew I had said the wrong thing.

"I would never stop working on a painting if I knew it was not
complete, no matter who was to get it," he muttered. "That is not how
I work."

"No, sir." I swallowed and gazed at the tiled floor. Stupid girl, I
thought, my jaw tightening.

"Go and prepare yourself."

Bowing my head, I hurried to the storeroom where I kept the blue and
yellow cloths. I had never felt his disapproval so strongly. I did not
think I could bear it. I removed my cap and, feeling the ribbon that
tied up my hair was coming undone, I pulled it off. I was reaching
back to gather up my hair again when I heard one of the loose floor
tiles in the studio clink. I froze. He had never come into the
storeroom while I was changing. He had never asked that of me.

I turned round, my hands still in my hair. He stood on the threshold,
gazing at me.

I lowered my hands. My hair fell in waves over my shoulders, brown
like fields in the autumn. No one ever saw it but me.



"Your hair," he said. He was no longer angry.

At last he let me go with his eyes.

***


Now that he had seen my hair, now that he had seen me revealed, I no
longer felt I had something precious to hide and keep to myself. I
could be freer, if not with him, then with someone else. It no longer
mattered what I did and did not do.

That evening I slipped from the house and found Pieter the son at one
of the taverns where the butchers drank, near the Meat Hall. Ignoring
the whistles and remarks, I went up to him and asked him to come with
me. He set down his beer, his eyes wide, and followed me outside,
where I took his hand and led him to a nearby alley. There I pulled up
my skirt and let him do as he liked.  Clasping my hands around his
neck, I held on while he found his way into me and began to push
rhythmically. He gave me pain, but when I remembered my hair loose
around my shoulders in the studio, I felt something like pleasure too.

Afterwards, back at Papists' Corner, I washed myself with vinegar.

When I next looked at the painting he had added a wisp of hair peeking
out from the blue cloth above my left eye.

***


The next time I sat for him he did not mention the earring. He did not
hand it to me, as I had feared, or change how I sat, or stop painting.

He did not come into the storeroom again to see my hair either.

He sat for a long time, mixing colors on his palette with his palette
knife.  There was red and ocher there, but the paint he was mixing was
mostly white, to which he added daubs of black, working them together
slowly and carefully, the silver diamond of the knife flashing in the
grey paint.

"Sir?" I began.

He looked up at me, his knife stilled.


"I have seen you paint sometimes without the model being here. Could
you not paint the earring without me wearing it?"

The palette knife remained still. "You would like me to imagine you
wearing the pearl, and paint what I imagine?"

"Yes, sir."

He looked down at the paint, the palette knife moving again. I think
he smiled a little. "I want to see you wear the earring."

"But you know what will happen then, sir."

"I know the painting will be complete."

You will ruin me, I thought. Again I could not bring myself to say it.
"What will your wife say when she sees the finished painting?" I asked
instead, as boldly as I dared.

"She will not see it. I will give it directly to van Ruijven." It was
the first time he had admitted he was painting me secretly, that
Catharina would disapprove.

"You need only wear it once," he added, as if to placate me. "The next
time I paint you I will bring it. Next week. Catharina will not miss
it for an afternoon."

"But, sir," I said, "my ear is not pierced."

He frowned slightly. "Well, then, you will need to take care of that."
This was clearly a woman's detail, not something he felt he need
concern himself with.  He tapped the knife and wiped it with a rag.
"Now, let us begin. Chin down a bit." He gazed at me. "Lick your lips,
Griet."

I licked my lips.

"Leave your mouth open."

I was so surprised by this request that my mouth remained open of its
own will. I blinked back tears. Virtuous women did not open their
mouths in paintings.

It was as if he had been in the alley with Pieter and me.

You have ruined me, I thought. I licked my lips again.

"Good," he said.

***


I did not want to do it to myself. I was not afraid of pain, but I did
not want to take a needle to my own ear.

If I could have chosen someone to do it for me, it would have been my
mother.  But she would never have understood, nor agreed to it without
knowing why.  And if she had been told why, she would have been
horrified.

I could not ask Tanneke, or Maertge.

I considered asking Maria Thins. She may not yet have known about the
earring, but she would find out soon enough. I could not bring myself
to ask her, though, to have her take part in my humiliation.

The only person who might do it and understand was Frans. I slipped
out the next afternoon, carrying a needlecase Maria Thins had given
me. The woman with the sour face at the factory gate smirked when I
asked to see him.

"He's long gone and good riddance," she answered, relishing the words.

"Gone? Gone where?"

The woman shrugged. "Towards Rotterdam, they say. And then, who knows?
Perhaps he'll make his fortune on the seas, if he doesn't die between
the legs of some Rotterdam whore." These last bitter words made me
look at her more closely. She was with child.

Cornelia had not known when she broke the tile of Frans and me that
she would come to be right--that he would split from me and from the
family.  Will I ever see him again? I thought. And what will our
parents say? I felt more alone than ever.

The next day I stopped at the apothecary's on my way back from the
fish stalls. The apothecary knew me now, even greeting me by name.
"And what is it that he wants today?" he asked. "Canvas? Vermilion?
Ocher? Linseed oil?"



"He does not need anything," I answered nervously. "Nor my mistress. I
have come--" For a moment I considered asking him to pierce my ear. He
seemed a discreet man, who might do it without telling anyone or
demanding to know why.

I could not ask a stranger such a thing. "I need something to numb the
skin," I said.

"Numb the skin?"

"Yes. As ice does."

"Why do you want to numb the skin?"

I shrugged and did not answer, studying the bottles on the shelves
behind him.

"Clove oil," he said at last with a sigh. He reached behind him for a
flask.  "Rub a little on the spot and leave it for a few minutes. It
doesn't last long, though."

"I would like some, please."

"And who is to pay for this? Your master? It is very dear, you know.
It comes from far away." In his voice was a mixture of disapproval and
curiosity.

"I will pay. I only want a little." I removed a pouch from my apron
and counted the precious stuivers onto the table. A tiny bottle of it
cost me two days' wages. I had borrowed some money from Tanneke,
promising to repay her when I was paid on Sunday.

When I handed over my reduced wages to my mother that Sunday I told
her I had broken a hand mirror and had to pay for it.

"It will cost more than two days' wages to replace that," she scolded.
"What were you doing, looking at yourself in a mirror? How careless."

"Yes," I agreed. "I have been very careless."

***



I waited until late, when I was sure everyone in the house was asleep.
Although usually no one came up to the studio after it was locked for
the night, I was still fearful of someone catching me, with my needle
and mirror and clove oil. I stood by the locked studio door,
listening. I could hear Catharina pacing up and down the hallway
below. She was having a hard time sleeping now--her body had become too
cumbersome to find a position she could lie in comfortably. Then I
heard a child's voice, a girl's, trying to speak low but unable to
hide its bright ring. Cornelia was with her mother. I could not hear
what they said, and because I was locked into the studio, I could not
creep to the top of the stairs to listen more closely.

Maria Thins was also moving about in her rooms next to the storeroom.
It was a restless house, and it made me restless too. I made myself
sit in my lion-head chair to wait. I was not sleepy. I had never felt
so awake.

Finally Catharina and Cornelia went back to bed, and Maria Thins
stopped rustling next door. As the house grew still, I remained in my
chair. It was easier to sit there than do what I had to do. When I
could not delay any longer, I got up and first peeked at the painting.
All I could really see now was the great hole where the earring should
go, which I would have to fill.

I took up my candle, found the mirror in the storeroom, and climbed to
the attic. I propped the mirror against the wall on the grinding table
and set the candle next to it. I got out my needlecase and, choosing
the thinnest needle, set the tip in the flame of the candle. Then I
opened the bottle of clove oil, expecting it to smell foul, of mould
or rotting leaves, as remedies often do.  Instead it was sweet and
strange, like honeycakes left out in the sun. It was from far away,
from places Frans might get to on his ships. I shook a few drops onto
a rag, and swabbed my left earlobe. The apothecary was right-- when I
touched the lobe a few minutes later it felt as if I had been out in
the cold without wrapping a shawl around my ears.

I took the needle out of the flame and let the glowing red tip change
to dull orange and then to black. When I leaned towards the mirror I
gazed at myself for a moment. My eyes were full of liquid in the
candlelight, glittering with fear.

Do this quickly, I thought. It will not help to delay.

I pulled the earlobe taut and in one movement pushed the needle
through my flesh.

Just before I fainted I thought, I have always wanted to wear pearls.

***


Every night I swabbed my ear and pushed a slightly larger needle
through the hole to keep it open. It did not hurt too much until the
lobe became infected and began to swell. Then no matter how much clove
oil I dabbed on the ear, my eyes streamed with tears when I drove the
needle through. I did not know how I would manage to wear the earring
without fainting again.

I was grateful that I wore my cap over my ears so that no one saw the
swollen red lobe. It throbbed as I bent over the steaming laundry, as
I ground colors, as I sat in church with Pieter and my parents.

It throbbed when van Ruijven caught me hanging up sheets in the
courtyard one morning and tried to pull my chemise down over my
shoulders and expose my bosom.

"You shouldn't fight me, my girl," he murmured as I backed away from
him.  "You'll enjoy it more if you don't fight. And you know, I will
have you anyway when I get that painting." He pushed me against the
wall and lowered his lips to my chest, pulling at my breasts to free
them from the dress.

"Tanneke!" I called desperately, hoping in vain that she had returned
early from an errand to the baker's.

"What are you doing?"

Cornelia was watching us from the doorway. I had never expected to be
glad to see her.

Van Ruijven raised his head and stepped back. "We're playing a game,
dear girl," he replied, smiling. "Just a little game. You'll play it
too when you're older." He straightened his cloak and stepped past her
into the house.

I could not meet Cornelia's eye. I tucked in my chemise and smoothed
my dress with shaking hands. When finally I looked up she was gone.

***


The morning of my eighteenth birthday I got up and cleaned the studio
as usual. The concert painting was done--in a few days van Ruijven
would come to view it and take it away. Although I did not need to
now, I still cleaned the studio scene carefully, dusting the
harpsichord, the violin, the bass viol,

brushing the table rug with a damp cloth, polishing the chairs,
mopping the grey and white floor tiles.

I did not like the painting as much as his others. Although it was
meant to be more valuable with three figures in it, I preferred the
pictures he had painted of women alone--they were purer, less
complicated. I found I did not want to look at the concert for long,
or try to understand what the people in it were thinking.

I wondered what he would paint next.

Downstairs I set water on the fire to heat and asked Tanneke what she
wanted from the butcher. She was sweeping the steps and tiles in front
of the house.  "A rack of beef," she replied, leaning against her
broom. "Why not have something nice?" She rubbed her lower back and
groaned. "It may take my mind off my aches."

"Is it your back again?" I tried to sound sympathetic, but Tanneke's
back always hurt. A maid's back would always hurt. That was a maid's
life.

Maertge came with me to the Meat Hall, and I was glad of it--since that
night in the alley I was embarrassed to be alone with Pieter the son.
I was not sure how he would treat me. If I was with Maertge, however,
he would have to be careful of what he said or did.

Pieter the son was not there--only his father, who grinned at me. "Ah,
the birthday maid!" he cried. "An important day for you."

Maertge looked at me in surprise. I had not mentioned my birthday to
the family--there was no reason to.

"There's nothing important about it," I snapped.

"That's not what my son said. He's off now, on an errand. Someone to
see." Pieter the father winked at me. My blood chilled. He was saying
something without saying it, something I was meant to understand.

"Your finest rack of beef," I ordered, deciding to ignore him.

"In celebration, then?" Pieter the father never let things drop, but
pushed them as far as he could.



I did not reply. I simply waited until he served me, then put the beef
in my pail and turned away.

"Is it really your birthday, Griet?" Maertge whispered as we left the
Meat Hall.

"Yes."

"How old are you?"

"Eighteen."

"Why is eighteen so important?"

"It's not. You mustn't listen to what he says--he's a silly man."

Maertge didn't look convinced. Nor was I. His words had tugged at
something in my mind.

I worked all morning rinsing and boiling laundry. My mind turned to
many things while I sat over the tub of steaming water. I wondered
where Frans was, and if my parents had heard yet that he had left
Delft. I wondered what Pieter the father had meant earlier, and where
Pieter the son was. I thought of the night in the alley. I thought of
the painting of me, and wondered when it would be done and what would
happen to me then. All the while my ear throbbed, stabbing with pain
whenever I moved my head.

It was Maria Thins who came to get me.

"Leave your washing, girl," I heard her say behind me. "He wants you
upstairs." She was standing in the doorway, shaking something in her
hand.

I got up in confusion. "Now, madam?"

"Yes, now. Don't be coy with me, girl. You know why. Catharina has
gone out this morning, and she doesn't do that much these days, now
her time is closer. Hold out your hand."

I dried a hand on my apron and held it out. Maria Thins dropped a pair
of pearl earrings into my palm.

"Take them up with you now. Quickly."


I could not move. I was holding two pearls the size of hazelnuts,
shaped like drops of water. They were silvery grey, even in the
sunlight, except for a dot of fierce white light. I had touched pearls
before, when I brought them upstairs for van Ruijven's wife and tied
them round her neck or laid them on the table.  But I had never held
them for myself before.

"Go on, girl," Maria Thins growled impatiently. "Catharina may come
back sooner than she said."

I stumbled into the hallway, leaving the laundry unwrung. I climbed
the stairs in full view of Tanneke, who was bringing in water from the
canal, and Aleydis and Cornelia, who were rolling marbles in the
hallway. They all looked up at me.

"Where are you going?" Aleydis asked, her grey eyes bright with
interest.

"To the attic," I replied softly.

"Can we come with you?" Cornelia said in a taunting voice.

"No."

"Girls, you're blocking my way." Tanneke pushed past them, her face
dark.

The studio door was ajar. I stepped inside, pressing my lips together,
my stomach twisting. I closed the door behind me.

He was waiting for me. I held my hand out to him and dropped the
earrings into his palm.

He smiled at me. "Go and wrap up your hair."

I changed in the storeroom. He did not come to look at my hair. As I
returned I glanced at The Procuress on the wall. The man was smiling
at the young woman as if he were squeezing pears in the market to see
if they were ripe. I shivered.

He was holding up an earring by its wire. It caught the light from the
window, capturing it in a tiny panel of bright white.

"Here you are, Griet." He held out the pearl to me.


"Griet! Griet! Someone is here to see you!" Maertge called from the
bottom of the stairs.

I stepped to the window. He came to my side and we looked out.

Pieter the son was standing in the street below, arms crossed. He
glanced up and saw us standing together at the window. "Come down,
Griet," he called. "I want to speak to you." He looked as if he would
never move from his spot.

I stepped back from the window. "I'm sorry, sir," I said in a low
voice. "I won't be long." I hurried to the storeroom, pulled off the
headcloths and changed into my cap. He was still standing at the
window, his back to me, as I passed through the studio.

The girls were sitting in a row on the bench, staring openly at
Pieter, who stared back at them.

"Let's go around the corner," I whispered, moving towards the
Molenpoort.  Pieter did not follow, but continued to stand with his
arms crossed.

"What were you wearing up there?" he asked. "On your head."

I stopped and turned back. "My cap."

"No, it was blue and yellow."

Five sets of eyes watched us--the girls on the bench, him at the
window. Then Tanneke appeared in the doorway, and that made six.

"Please, Pieter," I hissed. "Let's go along a little way."

"What I have to say can be said in front of anyone. I have nothing to
hide." He tossed his head, his blond curls falling around his ears.

I could see he would not be silenced. He would say what I dreaded he
would say in front of them all.

Pieter did not raise his voice, but we all heard his words. "I've
spoken to your father this morning, and he has agreed that we may
marry now you are eighteen. You can leave here and come to me. Today."



I felt my face go hot, whether from anger or shame I was not sure.
Everyone was waiting for me to speak.

I drew in a deep breath. "This is not the place to talk about such
things," I replied severely. "Not in the street like this. You were
wrong to come here." I did not wait for his response, though as I
turned to go back inside he looked stricken.

"Griet!" he cried.

I pushed past Tanneke, who spoke so softly that I was not sure I heard
her right. "Whore."

I ran up the stairs to the studio. He was still standing at the window
as I shut the door. "I am sorry, sir," I said. "I'll just change my
cap."

He did not turn round. "He is still there," he said.

When I returned, I crossed to the window, though I did not stand too
close in case Pieter could see me again with my head wrapped in blue
and yellow.

My master was not looking down at the street any longer, but at the
New Church tower. I peeked--Pieter was gone.

I took my place in the lion-head chair and waited.

When he turned at last to face me, his eyes were masked. More than
ever, I did not know what he was thinking.

"So you will leave us," he said.

"Oh, sir, I do not know. Do not pay attention to words said in the
street like that."

"Will you marry him?"

"Please do not ask me about him."

"No, perhaps I should not. Now, let us begin again." He reached around
to the cupboard behind him, picked up an earring, and held it out to
me.



"I want you to do it." I had not thought I could ever be so bold.

Nor had he. He raised his eyebrows and opened his mouth to speak, but
did not say anything.

He stepped up to my chair. My jaw tightened but I managed to hold my
head steady. He reached over and gently touched my earlobe.

I gasped as if I had been holding my breath under water.

He rubbed the swollen lobe between his thumb and finger, then pulled
it taut.  With his other hand he inserted the earring wire in the hole
and pushed it through. A pain like fire jolted through me and brought
tears to my eyes.

He did not remove his hand. His fingers brushed against my neck and
along my jaw. He traced the side of my face up to my cheek, then
blotted the tears that spilled from my eyes with his thumb. He ran his
thumb over my lower lip.  I licked it and tasted salt.

I closed my eyes then and he removed his fingers. When I opened them
again he had gone back to his easel and taken up his palette.

I sat in my chair and gazed at him over my shoulder. My ear was
burning, the weight of the pearl pulling at the lobe. I could not
think of anything but his fingers on my neck, his thumb on my lips.

He looked at me but did not begin to paint. I wondered what he was
thinking.

Finally he reached behind him again. "You must wear the other one as
well," he declared, picking up the second earring and holding it out
to me.

For a moment I could not speak. I wanted him to think of me, not of
the painting.

"Why?" I finally answered. "It can't be seen in the painting."

"You must wear both," he insisted. "It is a farce to wear only one."

"But--my other ear is not pierced," I faltered.

"Then you must tend to it." He continued to hold it out.


I reached over and took it. I did it for him. I got out my needle and
clove oil and pierced my other ear. I did not cry, or faint, or make a
sound. Then I sat all morning and he painted the earring he could see,
and I felt, stinging like fire in my other ear, the pearl he could not
see.

The clothes soaking in the kitchen went cold, the water grey. Tanneke
clattered in the kitchen, the girls shouted outside, and we behind our
closed door sat and looked at each other. And he painted.

When at last he set down his brush and palette, I did not change
position, though my eyes ached from looking sideways. I did not want
to move.

"It is done," he said, his voice muffled. He turned away and began
wiping his palette knife with a rag. I gazed at the knife--it had white
paint on it.

"Take off the earrings and give them back to Maria Thins when you go
down," he added.

I began to cry silently. Without looking at him, I got up and went
into the storeroom, where I removed the blue and yellow cloth from my
head. I waited for a moment, my hair out over my shoulders, but he did
not come. Now that the painting was finished he no longer wanted me.

I looked at myself in the little mirror, and then I removed the
earrings. Both holes in my lobes were bleeding. I blotted them with a
bit of cloth, then tied up my hair and covered it and my ears with my
cap, leaving the tips to dangle below my chin.

When I came out again he was gone. He had left the studio door open
for me.  For a moment I thought about looking at the painting to see
what he had done, to see it finished, the earring in place. I decided
to wait until night, when I could study it without worrying that
someone might come in.

I crossed the studio and shut the door behind me.

I always regretted that decision. I never got to have a proper look at
the finished painting.

***


Catharina arrived back only a few minutes after I had handed the
earrings to Maria Thins, who immediately replaced them in the jewelry
box. I hurried to

the cooking kitchen to help Tanneke with dinner. She would not look at
me straight, but gave me sideways glances, occasionally shaking her
head.

He was not at dinner--he had gone out. After we had cleared up I went
back to the courtyard to finish rinsing the laundry. I had to haul in
new water and reheat it. While I worked Catharina slept in the great
hall. Maria Thins smoked and wrote letters in the Crucifixion room.
Tanneke sat in the front doorway and sewed. Maertge perched on the
bench and made lace. Next to her Aleydis and Lisbeth sorted their
shell collection.

I did not see Cornelia.

I was hanging up an apron when I heard Maria Thins say, "Where are you
going?" It was the tone of her voice rather than what she said that
made me pause in my work. She sounded anxious.

I crept inside and along the hallway. Maria Thins was at the foot of
the stairs, gazing up. Tanneke had come to stand in the front doorway,
as she had earlier that day, but facing in and following the look of
her mistress. I heard the stairs creak, and the sound of heavy
breathing. Catharina was pulling herself up the stairs.

In that moment I knew what was going to happen--to her, to him, to me.

Cornelia is there, I thought. She is leading her mother to the
painting.

I could have cut short the misery of waiting. I could have left then,
walked out the door with the laundry not done, and not looked back.
But I could not move.  I stood frozen, as Maria Thins stood frozen at
the bottom of the stairs. She too knew what would happen, and she
could not stop it.

I sank to the floor. Maria Thins saw me but did not speak. She
continued to gaze up uncertainly. Then the noise on the stairs stopped
and we heard Catharina's heavy tread over to the studio door. Maria
Thins darted up the stairs. I remained on my knees, too weary to rise.
Tanneke stood blocking the light from the front door. She watched me,
her arms crossed, her face expressionless.

Soon after there was a shout of rage, then raised voices which were
quickly lowered.

***


Cornelia came down the stairs. "Mama wants Papa to come home," she
announced to Tanneke.

Tanneke stepped backwards outside and turned towards the bench.
"Maertge, go and find your father at the Guild," she ordered.
"Quickly. Tell him it's important."

Cornelia look around. When she saw me her face lit up. I got up from
my knees and walked stiffly back to the courtyard. There was nothing I
could do but hang up laundry and wait.

When he returned I thought for a moment that he might come and find me
in the courtyard, hidden among the hanging sheets. He did not--I heard
him on the stairs, then nothing.

I leaned against the warm brick wall and gazed up. It was a bright,
cloudless day, the sky a mocking blue. It was the kind of day when
children ran up and down the streets and shouted, when couples walked
out through the town gates, past the windmills and along the canals,
when old women sat in the sun and closed their eyes. My father was
probably sitting on the bench in front of his house, his face turned
towards the warmth. Tomorrow might be bitterly cold, but today it was
spring.

They sent Cornelia to get me. When she appeared between the hanging
clothes and looked down at me with a cruel smirk on her face, I wanted
to slap her as I had that first day I had come to work at the house. I
did not, though--I simply sat, hands in my lap, shoulders slumped, and
watched her show off her glee.  The sun caught glints of gold--traces
of her mother--in her red hair.

"You are wanted upstairs," she said in a formal voice. "They want to
see you." She turned and skipped back into the house.

I leaned over and brushed a bit of dust from my shoe. Then I stood,
straightened my skirt, smoothed my apron, pulled the tips of my cap
tight, and checked for loose strands of hair. I licked my lips and
pressed them together, took a deep breath and followed Cornelia.

Catharina had been crying--her nose was red, her eyes puffy. She was
sitting in the chair he normally pulled up to his easel--it had been
pushed towards the wall and the cupboard that held his brushes and
palette knife. When I appeared she heaved herself up so that she was
standing, tall and broad. Although she glared at me, she did not
speak. She squeezed her arms over her belly and winced.

Maria Thins was standing next to the easel, looking sober but also
impatient, as if she had other, more important things to attend to.

He stood next to his wife, his face without expression, hands at his
sides, eyes on the painting. He was waiting for someone, for
Catharina, or Maria Thins, or me, to begin.

I came to stand just inside the door. Cornelia hovered behind me. I
could not see the painting from where I stood.

It was Maria Thins who finally spoke.

"Well, girl, my daughter wants to know how you came to be wearing her
earrings." She said it as if she did not expect me to answer.

I studied her old face. She was not going to admit to helping me get
the earrings. Nor would he, I knew. I did not know what to say. So I
did not say anything.

"Did you steal the key to my jewelry box and take my earrings?"
Catharina spoke as if she were trying to convince herself of what she
said. Her voice was shaky.

"No, madam." Although I knew it would be easier for everyone if I said
I had stolen them, I could not lie about myself.

"Don't lie to me. Maids steal all the time. You took my earrings!"

"Are they missing now, madam?"

For a moment Catharina looked confused, as much by my asking a
question as by the question itself. She had obviously not checked her
jewelry box since seeing the painting. She had no idea if the earrings
were gone or not. But she did not like me asking the questions.
"Quiet, thief. They'll throw you in prison," she hissed, "and you
won't see sunlight for years." She winced again.  Something was wrong
with her.

"But, madam--"

"Catharina, you must not get yourself into a state," he interrupted
me. "Van Ruijven will take the painting away as soon as it is dry and
you can put it from your mind."

He did not want me to speak either. It seemed no one did. I wondered
why they had asked me upstairs at all when they were so afraid of what
I might say.

I might say, "What about the way he looked at me for so many hours
while he painted this painting?" I might say, "What about your mother
and your husband, who have gone behind your back and deceived you?"

Or I might simply say, "Your husband touched me, here, in this room."

They did not know what I might say.

Catharina was no fool. She knew the real matter was not the earrings.
She wanted them to be, she tried to make them be so, but she could not
help herself. She turned to her husband. "Why," she asked, "have you
never painted me?"

As they gazed at each other it struck me that she was taller than he,
and, in a way, more solid.

"You and the children are not a part of this world," he said. "You are
not meant to be."

"And she is?" Catharina cried shrilly, jerking her head at me.

He did not answer. I wished that Maria Thins and Cornelia and I were
in the kitchen or the Crucifixion room, or out in the market. It was
an affair for a man and his wife to discuss alone.

"And with my earrings?"

Again he was silent, which stirred Catharina even more than his words
had.  She began to shake her head so that her blond curls bounced
around her ears.  "I will not have this in my own house," she
declared. "I will not have it!" She looked around wildly. When her
eyes fell on the palette knife a shiver ran through me. I took a step
forward at the same time as she moved to the cupboard and grabbed the
knife. I stopped, unsure of what she would do next.

He knew, though. He knew his own wife. He moved with Catharina as she
stepped up to the painting. She was quick but he was quicker--he caught
her by the wrist as she plunged the diamond blade of the knife towards
the painting. He stopped it just before the blade touched my eye. From
where I stood I could see the wide eye, a flicker of earring he had
just added, and the

winking of the blade as it hovered before the painting. Catharina
struggled but he held her wrist firmly, waiting for her to drop the
knife. Suddenly she groaned. Flinging the knife away, she clutched her
belly. The knife skidded across the tiles to my feet, then spun and
spun, slower and slower, as we all stared at it. It came to a stop
with the blade pointed at me.

I was meant to pick it up. That was what maids were meant to do--pick
up their master's and mistress's things and put them back in their
place.

I looked up and met his eye, holding his grey gaze for a long moment.
I knew it was for the last time. I did not look at anyone else.

In his eyes I thought I could see regret.

I did not pick up the knife. I turned and walked from the room, down
the stairs and through the doorway, pushing aside Tanneke. When I
reached the street I did not look back at the children I knew must be
sitting on the bench, nor at Tanneke, who would be frowning because I
had pushed her, nor up at the windows, where he might be standing. I
got to the street and I began to run. I ran down the Oude Langendijck
and across the bridge into Market Square.

Only thieves and children run.

I reached the center of the square and stopped in the circle of tiles
with the eight-pointed star in the middle. Each point indicated a
direction I could take.

I could go back to my parents.

I could find Pieter at the Meat Hall and agree to marry him.

I could go to van Ruijven's house--he would take me in with a smile.

I could go to van Leeuwenhoek and ask him to take pity on me.

I could go to Rotterdam and search for Frans.

I could go off on my own somewhere far away.

I could go back to Papists' Corner.

I could go into the New Church and pray to God for guidance.


I stood in the circle, turning round and round as I thought.

When I made my choice, the choice I knew I had to make, I set my feet
carefully along the edge of the point and went the way it told me,
walking steadily.

***


				 1676

***

When I looked up and saw her I almost dropped my knife. I had not set
eyes on her in ten years. She looked almost the same, though she had
grown a little broader, and as well as the old pockmarks, her face now
carried scars up one side--Maertge, who still came to see me from time
to time, had told me of the accident, the mutton joint that spat hot
oil.

She had never been good at roasting meat.

She was standing far enough away that it was not clear she had indeed
come to see me. I knew, though, that this could be no chance. For ten
years she had managed to avoid me in what was not a big town. I had
not once run into her in the market or the Meat Hall, or along any of
the main canals. But then, I did not walk along the Oude Langendijck.

She approached the stall reluctantly. I set down my knife and wiped my
bloody hands on my apron. "Hello, Tanneke," I said calmly, as if I had
only seen her a few days before. "How have you been keeping?"

"Mistress wants to see you," Tanneke said bluntly, frowning. "You're
to come to the house this afternoon."

It had been many years since someone had ordered me about in that
tone.  Customers asked for things, but that was different. I could
refuse them if I didn't like what I heard.

"How is Maria Thins?" I asked, trying to remain polite. "And how is
Catharina?"


"As well as can be expected, given what's happened."

"I expect they will manage."

"My mistress has had to sell some property, but she's being clever
with the arrangements. The children will be all right." As in the
past, Tanneke could not resist praising Maria Thins to anyone who
would listen, even if it meant being too eager with details.

Two women had come up and were standing behind Tanneke, waiting to be
served. Part of me wished they were not there so that I could ask her
more questions, lead her to give away other details, to tell me much
more about so many things. But another part of me--the sensible part
that I had held to now for many years--did not want to have anything to
do with her. I did not want to hear.

The women shifted from side to side as Tanneke stood solidly in front
of the stall, still frowning but with a softer face. She pondered the
cuts of meat laid out before her.

"Would you like to buy something?" I asked.

My question snapped her out of her stupor. "No," she muttered.

They bought their meat now from a stall at the far end of the Meat
Hall. As soon as I began working alongside Pieter they had switched
butchers--so abruptly that they did not even pay their bill. They still
owed us fifteen guilders. Pieter never asked them for it. "It's the
price I have paid for you," he sometimes teased. "Now I know what a
maid is worth."

I did not laugh when he said this.

I felt a tiny hand tugging at my dress and looked down. Little Frans
had found me and was clinging to my skirt. I touched the top of his
head, full of blond curls like his father's. "There you are," I said.
"Where's Jan and your grandmother?"

He was too young to be able to tell me, but I then saw my mother and
elder son coming through the stalls towards me.

Tanneke looked back and forth between my sons and her face hardened.
She darted a look at me full of blame, but she did not say what she
was thinking.

She stepped back, treading on the foot of the woman directly behind
her.  "Mind you come this afternoon," she said, then turned away
before I could reply.

They had eleven children now--Maertge and market gossip had kept count
for me. Yet Catharina had lost the baby she delivered that day of the
painting and the palette knife. She gave birth in the studio
itself--she could not get down the stairs to her own bed. The baby had
come a month early and was small and sickly. It died not long after
its birth feast. I knew that Tanneke blamed me for the death.

Sometimes I pictured his studio with Catharina's blood on the floor
and wondered how he was able still to work there.

Jan ran to his little brother and pulled him into a corner, where they
began to kick a bone back and forth between them.

"Who was that?" my mother asked. She had never seen Tanneke.

"A customer," I replied. I often shielded her from things I knew would
disturb her. Since my father's death she had become skittish as a wild
dog about the new, the different, the changed.

"She didn't buy anything," my mother remarked.

"No. We didn't have what she wanted." I turned to wait on the next
customer before my mother could ask more questions.

Pieter and his father appeared, carrying a side of beef between them.
They flung it onto the table behind their stall and took up their
knives. Jan and little Frans left their bone and ran over to watch. My
mother stepped back--she had never grown used to the sight of so much
meat. "I'll be getting along," she said, picking up her shopping pail.

"Can you watch the boys this afternoon? I have some errands to run."

"Where are you going?"

I raised my eyebrows. I had complained before to my mother that she
asked too many questions. She had grown old and suspicious when there
was usually nothing to be suspicious of. Now, though, when there was
something to hide from her, I found myself strangely calm. I did not
answer her question.

It was easier with Pieter. He simply glanced up at me from his work. I
nodded at him. He had decided long ago not to ask questions, even
though he knew I had thoughts sometimes that I did not speak of. When
he removed my cap on our wedding night and saw the holes in my ears he
did not ask.

The holes were long healed now. All that was left of them were tiny
buds of hard flesh I could feel only if I pressed the lobes hard
between my fingers.

***


It had been two months since I had heard the news. For two months now
I could walk around Delft without wondering if I would see him. Over
the years I had occasionally spotted him in the distance, on his way
to or from the Guild, or near his mother's inn, or going to van
Leeuwenhoek's house, which was not far from the Meat Hall. I never
went near him, and I was not sure if he ever saw me. He strode along
the streets or across the square with his eyes fixed on a distant
point--not rudely or deliberately, but as if he were in a different
world.

At first it was very hard for me. When I saw him I froze wherever I
was, my chest tightened, and I could not get my breath. I had to hide
my response from Pieter the father and son, from my mother, from the
curious market gossips.

For a long time I thought I might still matter to him.

After a while, though, I admitted to myself that he had always cared
more for the painting of me than for me.

It grew easier to accept this when Jan was born. My son made me turn
inward to my family, as I had done when I was a child, before I became
a maid. I was so busy with him that I did not have time to look out
and around me. With a baby in my arms I stopped walking round the
eight-pointed star in the square and wondering what was at the end of
each of its points. When I saw my old master across the square my
heart no longer squeezed itself like a fist. I no longer thought of
pearls and fur, nor longed to see one of his paintings.

Sometimes on the streets I ran into the others--Catharina, the
children, Maria Thins. Catharina and I turned our faces from each
other. It was easier that way.  Cornelia looked through me with
disappointed eyes. I think she had hoped to destroy me completely.
Lisbeth was kept busy looking after the boys, who were too young to
remember me. And Aleydis was like her father--her grey eyes looked
about her without settling on anything near to her. After a time


there were other children I did not know, or knew only by their
father's eyes or their mother's hair.

Of all of them, only Maria Thins and Maertge acknowledged me, Maria
Thins nodding briefly when she saw me, Maertge sneaking away to the
Meat Hall to speak with me. It was Maertge who brought me my things
from the house-- the broken tile, my prayer book, my collars and caps.
It was Maertge who told me over the years of his mother's death and of
how he had to take over the running of her inn, of their growing debt,
of Tanneke's accident with the oil.

It was Maertge who announced gleefully one day, "Papa has been
painting me in the manner in which he painted you. Just me, looking
over my shoulder.  They are the only paintings he has done like that,
you know."

Not exactly in the manner, I thought. Not exactly. I was surprised,
though, that she knew of the painting. I wondered if she had seen it.

I had to be careful with her. For a long time she was but a girl, and
I did not feel it right to ask too much about her family. I had to
wait patiently for her to pass me tidbits of news. By the time she was
old enough to be more frank with me, I was not so interested in her
family now that I had my own.

Pieter tolerated her visits but I knew she made him uneasy. He was
relieved when Maertge married a silk merchant's son and began to see
less of me, and bought her meat from another butcher.

Now after ten years I was being called back to the house I had run
from so abruptly.

Two months before, I had been slicing tongue at the stall when I heard
a woman waiting her turn say to another, "Yes, to think of dying and
leaving eleven children and the widow in such debt."

I looked up and the knife cut deep into my palm. I did not feel the
pain of it until I had asked, "Who are you speaking of?" and the woman
replied, "The painter Vermeer is dead."

***


I scrubbed my fingernails especially hard when I finished at the
stall. I had long ago given up always scrubbing them thoroughly, much
to Pieter the father's amusement. "You see, you've grown used to
stained fingers as you

got used to the flies," he liked to say. "Now you know the world a
little better you can see there's no reason always to keep your hands
clean. They just get dirty again. Cleanliness is not as important as
you thought back when you were a maid, eh?" Sometimes, though, I
crushed lavender and hid it under my chemise to mask the smell of meat
that seemed to hang about me even when I was far from the Meat Hall.

There were many things I'd had to get used to.

I changed into another dress, a clean apron, and a newly starched cap.
I still wore my cap in the same way, and I probably looked much as I
had the day I first set out to work as a maid. Only now my eyes were
not so wide and innocent.

Although it was February, it was not bitterly cold. Many people were
out in Market Square--our customers, our neighbors, people who knew us
and would note my first step onto the Oude Langendijck in ten years. I
would have to tell Pieter eventually that I had gone there. I did not
know yet if I would need to lie to him about why.

I crossed the square, then the bridge leading from it over the canal
to the Oude Langendijck. I did not hesitate, for I did not want to
bring more attention to myself. I turned briskly and walked up the
street. It was not far--in half a minute I was at the house--but it felt
long to me, as if I were travelling to a strange city I had not
visited for many years.

Because it was a mild day, the door was open and there were children
sitting on the bench--four of them, two boys and two girls, lined up as
their older sisters had been ten years before when I first arrived.
The eldest was blowing bubbles, as Maertge had, though he laid down
his pipe the moment he saw me.  He looked to be ten or eleven years
old. After a moment I realized he must be Franciscus, though I did not
see much of the baby in him that I had known.  But then, I had not
thought much of babies when I was young. The others I did not
recognize, except for seeing them occasionally in town with the older
girls.  They all stared at me.

I addressed myself to Franciscus. "Please tell your grandmother that
Griet is here to see her."

Franciscus turned to the older of the two girls. "Beatrix, go and find
Maria Thins."

***


The girl jumped up obediently and went inside. I thought of Maertge
and Cornelia's scramble to announce me so long ago and smiled to
myself.

The children continued to stare at me. "I know who you are,"
Franciscus declared.

"I doubt you can remember me, Franciscus. You were but a baby when I
knew you."

He ignored my remark--he was following his own thought. "You're the
lady in the painting."

I started, and Franciscus smiled in triumph. "Yes, you are, though in
the painting you're not wearing a cap, but a fancy blue and yellow
headcloth."

"Where is this painting?"

He seemed surprised that I should ask. "With van Ruijven's daughter,
of course. He died last year, you know."

I had heard this news at the Meat Hall with secret relief. Van Ruijven
had never sought me out once I'd left, but I had always feared that he
would appear again one day with his oily smile and groping hands.

"How did you see the painting if it is at van Ruijven's?"

"Papa asked to have the painting on a short loan," Franciscus
explained. "The day after Papa died Mama sent it back to van Ruijven's
daughter."

I rearranged my mantle with shaking hands. "He wanted to see the
painting again?" I managed to say in a small voice.

"Yes, girl." Maria Thins had come to stand in the doorway. "It didn't
help matters here, I can tell you. But by that time he was in such a
state that we didn't dare say no, not even Catharina." She looked
exactly the same--she would never age. One day she would simply go to
sleep and not wake up.

I nodded to her. "I'm sorry for your loss and your troubles, madam."

"Yes, well, life is a folly. If you live long enough, nothing is
surprising."



I did not know how to respond to such words, so I simply said what I
knew to be true. "You wanted to see me, madam."

"No, it's Catharina who is to see you."

"Catharina?" I could not keep the surprise from my voice.

Maria Thins smiled sourly. "You never did learn to keep your thoughts
to yourself, did you, girl? Never mind, I expect you get by well
enough with your butcher, if he doesn't ask too much of you."

I opened my mouth to speak, then shut it.

"That's right. You're learning. Now, Catharina and van Leeuwenhoek are
in the great hall. He is the executor of the will, you see."

I did not see. I wanted to ask her what she meant, and why van
Leeuwenhoek was there, but I did not dare. "Yes, madam," I said
simply.

Maria Thins chuckled briefly. "The most trouble we've ever had with a
maid," she muttered, shaking her head before disappearing inside.

I stepped into the front hallway. There were still paintings hanging
everywhere on the walls, some I recognized, others I did not. I half
expected to see myself among the still lifes and seascapes, but of
course I was not there.

I glanced at the stairs leading up to his studio and stopped, my chest
tightening. To stand in the house again, his room above me, was more
than I thought I could bear, even though I knew he was not there. For
so many years I had not let myself think of the hours I spent grinding
colors at his side, sitting in the light of the windows, watching him
look at me. For the first time in two months I became fully aware that
he was dead. He was dead and he would paint no more paintings. There
were so few--I had heard that he never did paint faster, as Maria Thins
and Catharina had wanted him to.

It was only when a girl poked her head out from the Crucifixion room
that I forced myself to take a deep breath and walk down the hallway
towards her.  Cornelia was now about the age I had been when I first
became a maid. Her red hair had darkened over the ten years and was
simply dressed, without ribbons or braids. She had grown less menacing
to me over time. In fact I almost pitied her--her face was twisted by a
cunning that gave a girl her age an ugly look.


I wondered what would happen to her, what would happen to them all.
Despite Tanneke's confidence in her mistress's ability to arrange
things, it was a big family, with a big debt. I had heard in the
market that they had not paid their bill to the baker in three years,
and after my master's death the baker had taken pity on Catharina and
accepted a painting to settle the debt. For a brief moment I wondered
if Catharina was going to give me a painting too, to settle her debt
with Pieter.

Cornelia pulled her head back into the room and I stepped into the
great hall. It had not changed much since I had worked there. The bed
still had its green silk curtains, now faded. The ivory-inlaid
cupboard was there, and the table and Spanish leather chairs, and the
paintings of his family and hers. Everything appeared older, dustier,
more battered. The red and brown floor tiles were cracked or missing
in places.

Van Leeuwenhoek was standing with his back to the door, his hands
clasped behind him, studying a painting of soldiers drinking in a
tavern. He turned around and bowed to me, still the kind gentleman.

Catharina was seated at the table. She was not wearing black as I had
expected. I did not know if she meant to taunt me, but she wore the
yellow mantle trimmed with ermine. It too had a faded look about it,
as if it had been worn too many times. There were badly repaired rents
in the sleeves, and the fur had been eaten away in places by moths.
Nonetheless, she was playing her part as the elegant lady of the
house. She had dressed her hair carefully and was wearing powder and
her pearl necklace.

She was not wearing the earrings.

Her face did not match her elegance. No amount of powder could mask
her rigid anger, her reluctance, her fear. She did not want to meet
with me, but she had to.

"Madam, you wished to see me." I thought it best to address myself to
her, though I looked at van Leeuwenhoek as I spoke.

"Yes." Catharina did not gesture to a chair, as she would have to
another lady.  She let me stand.

There was an awkward silence as she sat and I stood, waiting for her
to begin.  She was clearly struggling to speak. Van Leeuwenhoek
shifted from one foot to the other.


I did not try to help her. There seemed to be no way that I could. I
watched her hands shuffle some papers on the table, run along the
edges of the jewelry box at her elbow, pick up the powder-brush and
set it down again. She wiped her hands on a white cloth.

"You know that my husband died two months ago?" she began at last.

"I had heard, madam, yes. I was very sorry to hear of it. May God keep
him."

Catharina did not seem to take in my feeble words. Her mind was
elsewhere.  She picked up the brush again and ran her fingers through
its bristles.

"It was the war with France, you see, that brought us to this state.
Not even van Ruijven wanted to buy paintings then. And my mother had
problems collecting her rents. And he had to take over the mortgage on
his mother's inn.  So it is no wonder things grew so difficult."

The last thing I had expected from Catharina was an explanation of why
they ran into debt. Fifteen guilders after all this time is not so
very much, I wanted to say. Pieter has let it go. Think no more of it.
But I dared not interrupt her.

"And then there were the children. Do you know how much bread eleven
children eat?" She looked up at me briefly, then back down at the
powder- brush.

One painting's worth over three years, I answered silently. One very
fine painting, to a sympathetic baker.

I heard the click of a tile in the hallway, and the rustle of a dress
being stilled by a hand. Cornelia, I thought, still spying. She too is
taking her place in the drama.

I waited, holding back the questions I wanted to ask.

Van Leeuwenhoek finally spoke. "Griet, when a will has been drawn up,"
he began in his deep voice, "an inventory of the family's possessions
must be taken to establish the assets while considering the debts.
However, there are private matters that Catharina would like to attend
to before this is done." He glanced at Catharina. She continued to
play with the powder-brush.

They do not like each other still, I thought. They would not even be
in the same room together if they could help it.

Van Leeuwenhoek picked up a piece of paper from the table. "He wrote
this letter to me ten days before he died," he said to me. He turned
to Catharina.  "You must do this," he ordered, "for they are yours to
give, not his or mine. As executor of his will I should not even be
here to witness this, but he was my friend, and I would like to see
his wish granted."

Catharina snatched the paper from his hand. "My husband was not a sick
man, you know," she addressed herself to me. "He was not really ill
until a day or two before his death. It was the strain of the debt
that drove him into a frenzy."

I could not imagine my master in a frenzy.

Catharina looked down at the letter, glanced at van Leeuwenhoek, then
opened her jewelry box. "He asked that you have these." She picked out
the earrings and after a moment's hesitation laid them on the table.

I felt faint and closed my eyes, touching the back of the chair
lightly with my fingers to steady myself.

"I have not worn them again," Catharina declared in a bitter tone. "I
could not."

I opened my eyes. "I cannot take your earrings, madam."

"Why not? You took them once before. And besides, it's not for you to
decide.  He has decided for you, and for me. They are yours now, so
take them."

I hesitated, then reached over and picked them up. They were cool and
smooth to the touch, as I had remembered them, and in their grey and
white curve a world was reflected.

I took them.

"Now go," Catharina ordered in a voice muffled with hidden tears. "I
have done what he asked. I will do no more." She stood up, crumpled
the paper and threw it on the fire. She watched it flare up, her back
to me.

I felt truly sorry for her. Although she could not see it, I nodded to
her respectfully, and then to van Leeuwenhoek, who smiled at me. "Take
care to remain yourself," he had warned me so long ago. I wondered if
I had done so.  It was not always easy to know.



I slipped across the floor, clutching my earrings, my feet making
loose tiles clink together. I closed the door softly behind me.

Cornelia was standing out in the hallway. The brown dress she wore had
been repaired in several places and was not as clean as it could be.
As I brushed past her she said in a low, eager voice, "You could give
them to me." Her greedy eyes were laughing.

I reached over and slapped her.

***


When I got back to Market Square I stopped by the star in the center
and looked down at the pearls in my hand. I could not keep them. What
would I do with them? I could not tell Pieter how I came to have
them--it would mean explaining everything that had happened so long
ago. I could not wear the earrings anyway--a butcher's wife did not
wear such things, no more than a maid did.

I walked around the star several times. Then I set out for a place I
had heard of but never been to, tucked away in a back street behind
the New Church. I would not have visited such a place ten years
before.

The man's trade was keeping secrets. I knew that he would ask me no
questions, nor tell anyone that I had gone to him. After seeing so
many goods come and go, he was no longer curious about the stories
behind them. He held the earrings up to the light, bit them, took them
outside to squint at them.

"Twenty guilders," he said.

I nodded, took the coins he held out, and left without looking back.

There were five extra guilders I would not be able to explain. I
separated five coins from the others and held them tight in my fist. I
would hide them somewhere that Pieter and my sons would not look, some
unexpected place that only I knew of.

I would never spend them.

Pieter would be pleased with the rest of the coins, the debt now
settled. I would not have cost him anything. A maid came free.


***


		     ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


One of the most helpful and readable sources on seventeenth-century
Holland is Simon Schama's The Embarrassment of Riches: An
Interpretation of Dutch Culture in the Golden Age (1987). What little
is known about Vermeer's life and family has been thoroughly
documented by John Montias in Vermeer and His Milieu (1989). The
catalogue for the 1996 Vermeer exhibition has beautiful reproductions
and clear analyses of the paintings.

I would like to thank Philip Steadman, Nicola Costaras, Humphrey
Ocean, and Joanna Woodall for talking with me about various aspects of
Vermeer's work.  Mick Bartram, Ora Dresner, Nina Killham, Dale
Reynolds, and Robert and Angela Royston all made helpful and
supportive comments about the manuscript in progress. Thanks, finally,
to my agent, Jonny Geller, and my editor, Susan Watt, for doing what
they do so well.

***



