BENJAMIN HOFF

THE TE OF PIGLET

For Lan Ts'ai ho

"It is hard to be brave," said Piglet, sniffing slightly, "when you're
only Very Small Animal." Rabbit, who had begun to write very busily,
looked up and said: "It is because you are a very small animal that you
will be Useful in the adventure before us."

CONTENTS

What? Another One?

Interjection

The-What Was That Again?-of Piglet

Very Small Animal

The Eeyore Effect

The Tigger Tendency

Things as They Might Be

Things as They Are

The Upright Heart

The Day of Piglet

Farewell

WHAT?
ANOTHER ONE?

One day not long ago, I found Piglet sitting by himself on the writing
table, gazing wistfully out the window. I asked what he was doing ...

"Oh, just wishing," he replied.

"Wishing what?" I asked.

"Nothing, really," he said, turning pinker than usual around the ears.

"You know I won't make fun of you if you tell me.

"Well ... I was only wishing-" "Yes?"

"Only wishing ... That someday someone would notice me."

"I notice you."

"I only meant-that is, most everyone notices Pooh..."

"Yes, most everyone does. Ever since the Pooh books came out, years ago."

"And now, especially," said Piglet. "Because of you-know-what."

"Ah, yes," I said. "Just for a moment, I'd forgotten."

And then it was my turn to gaze wistfully out the window, remembering the
spring of 1982. For it was then that Dutton released a book of mine called
The Tao of Pooh. It seemed so long ago, somehow .. .

The Tao of Pooh began as a reaction to what I considered an unfortunate
situation. Englishlanguage writings on the Chinese philosophy of
Taoism-which, I had come to realize, was far more than "Chinese," and far
more than "philosophy"-had for many years been dominated by scholarly
sorts who seemed more interested in cataloguing and bickering over Minute
Particulars than in communicating the practical wisdom of Taoist
principles.

For most of my life I had been learning those principles from various
Taoist teachers-some official and some not, some Chinese and some not,
some in human form and (the best instructors of them all) some not. I saw
them being muddled and mutilated in the "Taoist" writings of scholars who
were not Taoists, who had not been taught by Taoists, and who did not
practice Taoist skills and exercises-yet who monopolized the subject of
Taoism and sneered at anyone who suggested that there was more to it than
what they told.

I would come across such things as a description by the Taoist writer
Chuang-tse of some tactics of swordsmanship, translated into nonsense by
an Authority apparently ignorant of even the basic precepts of Taoist
martial arts ... And I would ask myself if there weren't something that
could be done about that sort of thing.

Then one day, while quoting to someone from A. A. Milne's Winnie-the-Pooh,
I got an Idea. I could write a book explaining Taoism through the
characters in Winnie-the-Pooh and The House at Pooh Corner. That would, it
seemed to me, release Taoist wisdom from the grip of the Overacademics and
restore to it the childlike awareness and sense of humor that they had
taken away.

On being told of the Idea, certain Eeyores advised me against attempting
anything of the sort. But following the advice of Eeyores has rarely
seemed A Particularly Good Thing for Me to Do.

Quite the contrary: If the Eeyores are against something, I tend to think
there might be something to it.

And so I wrote the manuscript, it was published, and that (I thought) was
the end of the matter. But it wasn't. It was more or less the beginning.

Before The Tao of Pooh, one would not have heard many nonscholarly or
nonmystical Westerners discussing Taoism. But today Taoist principles are
described in publications on business, science, psychology, health,
sports, music, art, writing, computer programming, and other subjects.
They are discussed in corporate-strategy sessions, high school and college
classes, and other gatherings of various kinds. And (according to what
I've read and heard) the book most often recommended to explain Taoist
principles is The Tao of Pooh. Colleges use the book as a text on Taoism,
psychiatrists give copies to their patients, ministers quote from it in
their sermons, Chinese martial arts instructors read it to their students,
and so on. I have even been told that some motel owners put it in their
rental units. It would seem that The Tao of Pooh (also known as Le Tao de
Pooh, Tao enligt Puh, Nalle Puh ja Tao, and such) is known and liked
around the world. And that, I must say, has pleased Pooh enormously.

"Oh, Pooh!" said everybody else except Eeyore.

"Thank-you," growled Pooh.

But Eeyore was saying to himself, "This writing business. Pencils and
what-not. Over-rated, if you ask me. Silly stuff. Nothing in it."

And so The Tao of Pooh has become known as a Remarkable Success. And until
fairly recently, I'd considered that The End. I'd explained Taoist
principles. I'd entertained with Pooh and friends. There were other things
I wanted to do, other things I wanted to be associated with. "Stop this
Remarkable Success, please," I asked. "I'd like to get off." But no one
wanted to let me off. "No, I don't intend a Tao of Pooh sequel. I don't
like sequels. Thank you very much. Good-bye."

But slowly and softly-so softly that for a long time I was unaware of
it-something began to steal into my consciousness. A small voice was
trying to catch my attention. After a while, I realized that it was
Piglet's. Finally I sat down and listened. And after listening for a
while, I began to take notes . . . There was more to be said, Piglet
pointed out-but no one was saying it, and it was needed today. It would be
needed even more, he said, in the years to come. Another book needn't be a
"sequel"; it could be a companion book, as The House at Pooh Corner is to
Winnie-the-Pooh. Why did I listen to Piglet? The answer lies in the past.

In my childhood, when the Pooh stories were first read to me, I
immediately developed a fondness for Piglet-from the beginning, he was my
favorite of the Pooh characters. That I knew, but I didn't know why. By
now I know why. And I hope that before you have finished reading this
book, you will know why, too.

INTERJECTION

We had wanted to make this the Introduction, but something else managed to
put itself ahead of it. So we decided that we couldn't call this an
Introduction, after all.

We asked Owl, who's the one to consult in matters of this sort, what one
calls an Introduction that comes after something else. "An Interjection,"
he knowingly replied. And since Owl says that this is an Interjection,
that is what it is.

Now, the first thing-

"Am I in it?" asked Pooh.

"Oh-Pooh. I didn't know you were here."

"Hardly anyone ever seems to notice," said Pooh sadly.

"Of course you're in it, Pooh. Now."

"That's good," he said, cheering up considerably.

What we want to explain in this Interjection-

"This what?" asked Pooh.

"Interjection. What we're doing now."

"Oh. Is that anything like an Interruption?" "Well, something of the sort.
I imagine."

Anyway, what we'd like to do in this Interruption is to explain that -
we'll have to say this softly - this book isn't just about Pooh.

"Beg pardon?" said Pooh. "Did someone say something?"

"I didn't hear anything," said I. "Oh," said Pooh.

"Er, Pooh-isn't that a rare bird in the tree outside the window? Or is it
a fish?"

"I don't see anything in the tree," said Pooh.

"I'm sure it's a fish. One of the rare ones."

"It must be," said Pooh. "If it's up a tree."

"Do go and find out, won't you, Pooh? Here, I'll open the door for you.
Take a good look. Goodbye."

Yes, this is not so much a Pooh book as it is a Piglet book. In these
pages, it will be the timid, yearning Piglet, rather than the comfortable,
contented Pooh, who shows us the Way. In other words, we'll be looking at
things from a slightly different angle. Since we are dealing with a more
timid animal this time, this book may seem a bit more serious than its
predecessor. But

"Ah-there you are," said Rabbit. "Piglet's fallen into the wastebasket."

Perhaps serious isn't quite the word we want. Perhaps

"Help! Help!"

-a better word would be quieter.

CRASH!!!*** P

"What in heaven's name was that?"

"Tigger's rescued him," said Rabbit.

"Poor Piglet. Tell him I'll be there immediately."

Excuse me.

THE - WHAT WAS THAT AGAIN? - OF PIGLET

One day when the sun had come back over the Forest, bringing with it the
scent of May, and all the streams of the Forest were tinkling happily to
find themselves their own pretty shape again, and the little pools lay
dreaming of the life they had seen and the big things they had done, and
in the warmth and quiet of the Forest the cuckoo was trying over his voice
carefully and listening to see if he liked it, and wood-pigeons were
complaining gently to themselves in their lazy comfortable way that it was
the other fellow's fault, but it didn't matter very much; on such a day as
this Christopher Robin whistled in a special way he had, and Owl came
flying out of the Hundred Acre Wood to see what was wanted.

"Ah-Pooh and Piglet. Come in and make yourselves comfortable. You're just
in time."

"In time for what?" asked Pooh hopefully. "For a bit of-"

"For a bit of Taoism."

"Oh. "

"Is it dangerous?" asked Piglet.

"Certainly not. You know what Taoism is." "Yes," said Piglet, not quite
sure. "Of course." "You see, before we go any further, we need
to explain Taoism."

"Didn't we do that already?" asked Pooh.

"That was in The Tao of Pooh. We need to say something Explanatory here,
as well. Just in case.

"In case of what?" asked Piglet nervously.

"In case ... Well, just in case. I suppose we could have Pooh say
something about it, but he probably can't remember what it is."

"Of course I can," replied Pooh. "It's ... That is, it's something like
... Or is it? What I mean is . . .

"That's what I thought."

"When you explained Taoism before," said Piglet, "you and Pooh went to
China. If we do that, I'll need to pack some things."

"No, we won't be going to China. We're going to stay right here."

"That's good," said Pooh, wandering over to the kitchen.

"Because we'll begin with a Taoist explanation of the Origin of Taoism.
And we might as well stay where we are, because wherever in the world we
may be at any moment is where Taoism startedwhether or not it was known
there by that name. It began before the time of the Great Separation . .
."

Thousands of years ago, man lived in harmony with the rest of the natural
world. Through what we would today call Telepathy, he communicated with
animals, plants, and other forms of life-none of which he considered
"beneath" himself, only different, with different jobs to perform. He
worked side by side with earth angels and nature spirits, with whom he
shared responsibility for taking care of the world.

The earth's atmosphere was very different from what it is now, with a
great deal more vegetation-supporting moisture. A tremendous variety of
vegetable, fruit, seed, and grain food was available. Because of such a
diet, and a lack of unnatural strain, human life span was many times
longer than what it is today. The killing of animals for food or "sport"
was unthinkable. Man lived at peace with himself and the various life
forms, whom he considered his teachers and friends.

But gradually at first, and then with increasing intensity, man's Ego
began to grow and assert itself. Finally, after it had caused many
unpleasant incidents, the consensus was reached that man should go out
into the world alone, to learn a necessary lesson. The connections were
broken.

On his own, feeling alienated from the world he had been created from, cut
off from the full extent of its abundance, man was no longer happy. He
began to search for the happiness he had lost. When he found something
that reminded him of it, he tried to possess it and accumulate morethereby
introducing Stress into his life. But searching for lasting happiness and
accumulating temporary substitutes for it brought him no satisfaction.

As he was no longer able to hear what the other forms of life were saying,
he could only try to understand them through their actions, which he often
misinterpreted. Because he was no longer cooperating with the earth angels
and nature spirits for the good of all, but was attempting to manipulate
the earth forces for his benefit alone, plants began to shrivel and die.
With less vegetation to draw up and give off moisture, the planet's
atmosphere became drier, and deserts appeared. A relatively small number
of plant species survived, which grew smaller and tougher with passing
time. Eventually they lost the radiant colors and abundant fruit of their
ancestors. Man's life span began to shorten accordingly, and diseases
appeared and spread. Because of the decreasing variety of food available
to him and his growing insensitivity man began to kill and eat his friends
the animals. They soon learned to flee from his approach and became
increasingly shy and suspicious of human motives and  behavior. And so the
separation grew. After several generations, few people had any idea of
what life had once been like.

As man became more and more manipulative of and violent toward the earth,
and as his social and spiritual world narrowed to that of the human race
alone, he became more and more manipulative of and violent toward his own
kind. Men began to kill and enslave each other, creating armies and
empires, forcing those who looked, talked, thought, and acted differently
from them to submit to what they thought was best.

Life became so miserable for the human race that, around two to three
thousand years ago, perfected spirits began to be born on earth in human
form, to teach the truths that had largely been forgotten. But by then
humanity had grown so divided, and so insensitive to the universal laws
operating in the natural world, that those truths were only partially
understood.

As time passed, the teachings of the perfected spirits were changed, for
what one might call political reasons, by the all-too-human organizations
that inherited them. Those who came into prominence within the
organizations wanted power over others. They downplayed the importance of
nonhuman life forms and eliminated from the teachings statements claiming
that those forms had souls, wisdom, and divine presence-and that the
heaven they were in touch with was a state of Unity with the Divine that
could be attained by anyone who put aside his ego and followed the
universal laws. The power-hungry wanted their followers to believe that
heaven was a place to which some people-and only people-went after death,
a place that could be reached by those who had the approval of their
organizations. So not even the perfected spirits were able to restore the
wholeness of truth, because of interference by the human ego.

Down through the centuries, accounts of the Great Separation, and of the
Golden Age that existed before it, have been passed on by the sensitive
and wise. Today in the industrial West, they are classified as mere
legends and myths-fantasies believed in by the credulous and
unsophisticated, stories based only on imagination and emotion. Despite
the fact that quite a few people have seen and communicated with earth
angels and nature spirits, and that more than one spiritual community has
grown luscious fruits and vegetables by cooperating with them and
following their instructions, descriptions of these beings are generally
dismissed as "fairy tales." And, although colored and simplified accounts
of the Great Separation can be found in the holy books of the world's
religions, it is doubtful that many followers of those religions strongly
believe in them.

However, a number of pre-Separation skills, beliefs, and practices have
been preserved. On the North American continent, they are passed on in
some of what remains of native teachings-those of the "Indians." In Europe
they have largely died out, but traces of their influence can still be
seen in such comparatively recent phenomena as stone circles and the
marking of "ley lines" (called "dragon veins" by the Chinese) - channels
along which earth energy is concentrated. In Tibet, until the Communist
invasion, ancient ways were preserved in Tibetan Buddhism, many of the
secrets and practices of which predate Buddhism by thousands of years. In
Japan, they can be found in some of the rituals and beliefs of the Shinto
("spirit way") folk religion. In China, they have been passed on through
Taoism. And, despite violent opposition from China's Communist government,
they continue to be passed on today.

Briefly, Taoism is a way of living in harmony with Tao, the Way of the
Universe, the character of which is revealed in the workings of the
natural world. Taoism could be called either a philosophy or a religion,
or neither, since in its various forms it does not match up with Western
ideas or definitions of either one.

In China, Taoism is what might be called the counterbalance of
Confucianism, the codified, ritualized teachings of K'ung Fu-tse, or
"Master K'ung," better known in the West as Confucius. Although
Confucianism is not a religion in the Western sense, it could be said to
bear a certain resemblance to puritanical Christianity in its
man-centered, nature-ignoring outlook, its emphasis on rigid conformity,
and its authoritarian, No-Nonsense attitude toward life. Confucianism
concerns itself mostly with human relations-with social and political
rules and hierarchies. Its major contributions have been in the areas of
government, business, clan and family relations, and ancestor reverence.
Its most vital principles are Righteousness, Propriety, Benevolence,
Loyalty, Good Faith, Duty, and Justice. Briefly stated, Confucianism deals
with the individual's place within the group.

In contrast, Taoism deals primarily with the individual's relationship to
the world. Taoism's contributions have been mostly scientific, artistic,
and spiritual. From Taoism came Chinese science, medicine, gardening,
landscape painting, and nature poetry. Its key principles are Natural
Simplicity, Effortless Action, Spontaneity, and Compassion. The most
easily noticed difference between Confucianism and Taoism is emotional, a
difference in feeling: Confucianism is stern, regimented, patriarchal,
often severe; Taoism is happy, gentle, childlike, and serene-like its
favorite symbol, that of flowing water.

Taoism is classically viewed as the teachings of three men: Lao-tse
("Master Lao"), author of the major Taoist classic, the Tao Te Ching,
which is said to have been written around twenty-five hundred years ago;
Chuang-tse ("Master Chuang"), author of several works and founder of a
school of writers and philosophers during the Warring States period,
approximately two thousand years ago; and the semilegendary Yellow
Emperor, who ruled over forty-five hundred years ago, and to whom are
attributed various meditative, alchemical, and medicinal principles and
practices. These three were the great organizers and communicators of
Taoist thought, rather than its founders; for, as we have said, what is
now known as Taoism began before any of them were born, in what Chuangtse
called the Age of Perfect Virtue:

In the Age of Perfect Virtue, men lived among the animals and birds as
members of one large family. There were no distinctions between "superior"
and "inferior" to separate one man or species from another. All retained
their natural Virtue and lived in the state of pure simplicity....

In the Age of Perfect Virtue, wisdom and ability were not singled out as
extraordinary. The wise were seen merely as higher branches on humanity's
tree, growing a little closer to the sun. People behaved correctly,
without knowing that to be Righteousness and Propriety. They loved and
respected each other, without calling that Benevolence. They were faithful
and honest, without considering that to be Loyalty. They kept their word,
without thinking of Good Faith. In their everyday conduct, they helped and
employed each other, without considering Duty. They did not concern
themselves with justice, as there was no injustice. Living in harmony with
themselves, each other, and the world, their actions left no trace, and so
we have no physical record of their existence.

*This and other selections from classical oriental texts are my own
translations and adaptations.-B. H.

Ever since the Great Separation, Taoists have concerned themselves with
attaining the state of Perfect Virtue, through discarding whatever
prevents harmony with Tao.

And with that mention of Virtue, we come to an explanation of the title of
this book.

"I wondered when you were going to get around to that," said Piglet. "So
did I. But, anyway ..."

First of all, we'd better explain that the Chinese character Te, as in
"The Te of Piglet," is pronounced DEH, more or less. If you want to be
particular, you can put a bit of an "r" sound at the end: DEHr. If you
want to be even more particular, you can pronounce it halfway between DEHr
and DUHr. And-

"And if you want to be more particular than that," interrupted Eeyore,
"you can take a correspondence course."

"Oh-Eeyore. I didn't know you were here. I thought you were out in your
swamp."

"Since we're being particular about things," said Eeyore, "it's a
bog-B-O-G. Yes, I was there. Then I made the mistake of coming here. And
now, having heard all I care to of this, I shall return."

"Well, don't let us detain you."

"So much for explanations," muttered Eeyore, on his way out the door.

"Eeyore's that way, isn't he?" said Piglet. "Not all the time," I said.
"Occasionally he's worse."

As we were saying, Te is pronounced DEH. In classical Chinese, it is
written two ways. The first joins the character for "upright" to the
character for "heart." Its meaning is virtue. The second way adds the
character for "left foot," which in Chinese signifies "stepping out." Its
meaning is

virtue in action.

Te is not, as its English-language equivalent suggests, a
one-size-fits-all sort of goodness or admired behavior that can be
recognized as essentially the same no matter who possesses it. It is
instead a quality of special character, spiritual strength, or hidden
potential unique to the individual-something that comes from the Inner
Nature of things. And something, we might add, that the individual who
possesses it may be quite unaware of-as is the case with Piglet through
most of the Pooh stories.

In this book, we are concerned with the transformation of Virtue into
Virtue That Steps Out. And Piglet, we believe, is the Pooh animal best
suited to demonstrate the process-because in the Pooh stories it is
Piglet, and only Piglet, who undergoes just such a transformation.

VERY SMALL ANIMAL

The Piglet lived in a very grand house in the middle of a beech-tree, and
the beech-tree was in the middle of the forest, and the Piglet lived in
the middle of the house. Next to his house was a piece of broken board
which had: "TRESPASSERS W" on it. When Christopher Robin asked the Piglet
what it meant, he said it was his grandfather's name, and had been in the
family for a long time. Christopher Robin said you couldn't be called
Trespassers W, and Piglet said yes, you could, because his grandfather
was, and it was short for Trespassers Will, which was short of Trespassers
William. And his grandfather had had two names in case he lost
one-Trespassers after an uncle, and William after Trespassers.

And so we are introduced to Piglet, in the third chapter of
Winnie-the-Pooh: Piglet, who craves security (he lives in the middle of a
house in the middle of a tree in the middle of a forest); Piglet, who
wants to be Somebody (so he invents a grandfather named Trespassers
William); Piglet, a squeaky voice with pink cheeks; Piglet, the Very Small
Animal. Unlike Pooh, who simply Is and Does, Piglet Agonizes.

For example, when Piglet and Pooh fell into the Gravel Pit .. .

"Pooh," he went on nervously, and came a little closer, "do you think
we're in a Trap?"

Pooh hadn't thought about it at all, but now he nodded. For suddenly he
remembered how he and Piglet had once made a Pooh Trap for Heffalumps, and
he guessed what had happened. He and Piglet had fallen into a Heffalump
Trap for Poohs! That was what it was.

"What happens when the Heffalump comes?" asked Piglet tremblingly, when he
had heard the news.

"Perhaps he won't notice you, Piglet," said Pooh encouragingly, "because
you're a Very Small Animal."

"But he'll notice you, Pooh."

"He'll notice me, and I shall notice him," said Pooh, thinking it out.
"We'll notice each other for a long time, and then he'll say: 'Ho-ho!' "

Piglet shivered a little at the thought of that "Hoho!" and his ears began
to twitch.

"W-what will you say?" he asked.

Pooh tried to think of something he would say, but the more he thought,
the more he felt that there is no real answer to "Ho-ho!" said by a
Heffalump in the sort of voice this Heffalump was going to say it in.

"I shan't say anything," said Pooh at last. "I shall just hum to myself,
as if I was waiting for something."

"Then perhaps he'll say, 'Ho-ho!' again?" suggested Piglet anxiously.

"He will," said Pooh.

Piglet's ears twitched so quickly that he had to lean them against the
side of the Trap to keep them quiet.

"He will say it again," said Pooh, "and I shall go on humming. And that
will Upset him. Because when you say 'Ho-ho!' twice, in a gloating sort of
way, and the other person only hums, you suddenly find, just as you begin
to say it the third time-that-that-well, you find -

What Pooh means to say is, it then isn't Ho-ho-ish anymore. At least,
that's what we think he means.

"But he'll say something else," said Piglet.

"That's just it. He'll say: `What's all this?' And then I shall say-and
this is a very good idea, Piglet, which I've just thought of-I shall say:
`It's a trap for a Heffalump which I've made, and I'm waiting for the
Heffalump to fall in.' And I shall go on humming. That will Unsettle him."

"Pooh!" cried Piglet You've saved us!" "Have I?" said Pooh, not feeling
quite sure.

But Piglet was quite sure; and his mind ran on, and he saw Pooh and the
Heffalump talking to each other, and he thought suddenly, and a little
sadly, that it would have been rather nice if it had been Piglet and the
Heffalump talking so grandly to each other, and not Pooh, much as he loved
Pooh; because he really had more brain than Pooh, and the conversation
would go better if he and not Pooh were doing one side of it, and it would
be comforting afterwards in the evenings to look back on the day when he
answered a Heffalump back as bravely as if the Heffalump wasn't there. It
seemed so easy now. He knew just what he would say....

And that's how it was in the Gravel Pit - until Christopher Robin came
along, looked down, and saw Piglet and Pooh. Then things became a bit
Complicated:

"Ho-ho!" said Christopher Robin loudly and suddenly.

Piglet jumped six inches in the air with Surprise and Anxiety, but Pooh
went on dreaming.

"It's the Heffalump!" thought Piglet nervously. "Now, then!" He hummed in
his throat a little, so that none of the words should stick, and then, in
the most delightfully easy way, he said: "Tra-la-la, tra-la-la. . . ." But
he didn't look round, because if you look round and see a Very Fierce
Heffalump looking down at you, sometimes you forget what you were going to
say.

"Rum-tum-tum-tiddle-um," said Christopher Robin in a voice like Pooh's....

"He's said the wrong thing," thought Piglet anxiously. "He ought to have
said, 'Ho-ho!' again. Perhaps I had better say it for him."

And, as fiercely as he could, Piglet said, "Ho-ho!"

"How did you get there, Piglet?" said Christopher Robin in his ordinary
voice.

"This is Terrible," thought Piglet. "First he talks in Pooh's voice, and
then he talks in Christopher Robin's voice, and he's doing it so as to
Unsettle me."

And being now Completely Unsettled, he said very quickly and squeakily:
"This is a trap for Poohs, and I'm waiting to fall in it, ho-ho, what's
all this, and then I say ho-ho again."

"What?" said Christopher Robin.

"A trap for ho-ho's," said Piglet huskily. "I've just made it, and I'm
waiting for the ho-ho to come come. "

Not very impressive, we're afraid.

"Oh. Hello, Piglet. Who's that rough-looking man I've seen following you
about lately?"

"He's my new Bodyguard," squeaked Piglet.

"Bodyguard? Why in the world do you need a bodyguard? Can't you look out
for yourself?"

"I suppose so," replied Piglet. "But I feel so much more Secure this way."

"He looks pretty tough. I hope you checked his references."

"References?"

"Yes. From places he's worked before. Does he have a bad record - arrests,
jail sentences, that sort of thing?"

"I-I don't think so," said Piglet.

"Well, I suppose it's all right. If you really think you need protection.
By the way-what's happened to the old family silverware?"

"What?"

"You know-the silver knives, forks, spoons, and things. They're not in the
drawer where they used to be. I just wondered if anything-"

"No," Piglet blurted out. "He couldn't haveI mean, they couldn't be.
They've been misplaced or something. Yes, that's it. They must be. They
... I ... Excuse me, I must be going. Goodbye."

That's odd.

We might point out here that Taoism has always been fond of Very Small
Animals. Aside from animals themselves - which Confucianists saw as mere
things to eat, sacrifice, or pull plows and wagons - the Very Small
Animals of traditional, Confucianist - dominated Chinese society were
women, children, and the poor. Stepped on by greedy merchants,
landholders, and government officials, the poor were at the very bottom of
the Confucianist social scale. To put it another way, they weren't on it
at all. Women, even those of wealthy families - especially those of
wealthy families - weren't much better off, as the Confucianists practiced
arranged marriage, polygamy, foot-binding (foot-breaking, actually), and
other customs so repressive to women that no one in today's West could
comprehend them. Children didn't have a very jolly time of it, either. To
the staunch Confucianist, children existed to carry on the family line,
unquestioningly obey their parents in every matter, and take every care of
them in their old agenot to have ideas, ideals, and interests of their
own. Under Confucianism, a father could justifiably kill a son who
disobeyed or disgraced him, as such behavior was considered criminal.

In contrast, Taoism held that respect was something one earned, and that
if Big Daddy misbehaved, his family had the right to rebel. That applied
to the emperor and his "family"-his subjects-as well: If the emperor was a
tyrant, the people had the right to take him off the throne. High
Confucianist officials lived in constant fear of Taoist - and
Buddhist-influenced secret societies that were ever ready to defend the
stepped-on and attempt to topple the Dragon Throne if conditions became
intolerable, which they often did.

Taoist sympathies were always with the Underdog - with the outcasts and
unfortunates of Chinese society, including those financially ruined by the
tricks of corrupt merchants and officials and forced to become "Brothers
of the Green Woods" (outlaws) and "Guests of Rivers and Lakes"
(vagabonds). The Chinese martial arts were developed primarily by Taoists
and Buddhist monks, in order to defend the defenseless and enable them to
defend themselves. They might better be termed the anti-martial arts, as
they were employed not only against armed bandits, but also against the
soldiers of warlords and governing bodies, whenever they turned their
swords against the weak. While Buddhist martial artists tended to
concentrate on the "hard" forms of defense (from which evolved the
forceful and direct Karate and Tae Kwon Do), Taoists tended to concentrate
on the "soft" forms, such as the fluid and indirect T'ai Chi Ch'iian and
Pa Kua Chang (similar to, but more sophisticated than, judo and Aikido).

In countering what they saw as abuse of power, Taoist writers did with
their communicative skills what Taoist martial artists did with disarming
moves and pressure points. Utilizing the vehicles of literary fact and
fiction, they publicized the misdeeds of the powerful and ridiculed the
devious, the arrogant, the pompous, and the cruel. Although annoyed
Confucianists often attempted to put an end to these writings, they were
generally unsuccessful, as the sympathies of the common people were
against them.

Considering that High and Mighty Confucianists tended to have little
respect for animals, and that they sometimes referred to the "lesser"
peoples of China as "pigs" and "dogs," it is not surprising that Taoist
writers recorded many animal stories-descriptions of actual occurrences as
well as imaginary tales-in which maligned creatures such as mice, snakes,
and birds of prey demonstrate virtuous conduct that Prestigious People
would do well to emulate. In these stories, the courage, affection,
faithfulness, and honesty of animals are contrasted with the
pretentiousness and hypocrisy of wealthy landholders, merchants, and
government officials. As an early example, Chuang-tse wrote:

The Officer of Prayer went to the pigpen in his official robes, and spoke
to the pigs. "Why should you complain?" he asked. "I will feed you grain
for three months. Then I will fast for ten dayswhile you eat-and keep
watch over you for three days after that. Then I will spread fresh mats
and place you on the carved sacrificial stand, before dispatching you to
the spirit world. Considering all that I will be doing for you, why should
you feel uneasy?"

If the official had been truly concerned with the welfare of the pigs, he
would have fed them bran and chaff and left them alone. But he looked at
the situation from the point of view of his own prestige. He preferred to
enjoy the robes and cap of his privileged office, and to ride about in an
ornamented carriage-knowing that when he died, he would be carried in
splendor to his grave, a magnificent canopy spread above his coffin. If he
had been concerned with the welfare of the pigs, he would not have
considered these things to be important.

Wealthy Confucianists weren't the only targets  of  Taoist writers. Like
the Marx Brothers or Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy, the Taoists satirized
Big Ego at any level of  society. This tendency can be seen in the
following story, "The Pear Seed," by the Ch'ing Dynasty writer P'u
Sung-ling:

A well-dressed farmer was selling his pears in the town marketplace. As
they were large and delicious, he was soon taking in quite a bit of money.
A passing Taoist, dressed in patched cotton and carrying a small shovel on
his back, stopped by the farmer's wagon and asked for a pear. The farmer
told him to go away. The Taoist refused to leave. The farmer grew angrier
and angrier. Soon he was shouting at the top of his voice.

"But there are hundreds of pears in your wagon," the Taoist calmly pointed
out. "I'm only asking for one. Why be so upset?"

More and more people gathered, attracted by the commotion. Some onlookers
told the farmer to toss the poor man a bruised pear. The farmer refused.
Finally, seeing that the uproar was about to turn into a riot, someone
bought a pear and handed it to the Taoist. After warmly thanking his
benefactor, the Taoist turned to the crowd.

"We followers of the Way are revolted by petty greed," he told them. "Let
me share this beautiful fruit with you kind people."

No one wanted to take a piece of the Taoist's pear. The spectators
insisted that he eat it himself.

"All I need is a seed to plant," the Taoist replied, "and then I'll be
able to repay you." He ate the fruit, except for one small seed. With his
little shovel he dug a hole, dropped the seed into it, and covered it
over. Then he called for heated water. Someone brought some from a nearby
shop. The crowd watched in intense fascination as the Taoist watered the
ground where the seed was planted.

Suddenly a small shoot appeared, which quickly grew into a tree. Branches
and leaves shot out in great profusion. The tree blossomed, then bore a
tremendous crop of large, luscious pears.

The Taoist distributed the fruit among the spectators. Soon all of it was
gone. Then, with his small shovel, he chopped down the tree. Waving to the
crowd, he happily departed, dragging the tree behind him.

All this time, the greedy farmer had been staring, openmouthed. Now he
turned back to his pears - only to find that they were gone. Shaking off
the effects of the Taoist's spell, he realized what had happened to them.
He saw that a section of his wagon's harnessing pole-the same diameter as
the trunk of the "pear tree" - had been chopped away.

Did someone just come in? Oh.

"So you're Piglet's new bodyguard. Well, well."

"You got a problem with that, buddy?" "No, not at all."

"Good. I wouldn't get any ideas if I was you, fella "

"Oh, yes you would. You'd get all sorts of ideas. Such as how easy it is
to pull someone off his feet with a loose rug-like the one you're standing
on."

"What're you talkin' about?"

"Oh  nothing. Just make yourself at home."

"T'anks."

In order to understand Taoist support of the Underdog, one needs to
understand the Taoist attitude toward power, from the Power of the
Universe on down. As with other matters, the Taoist view was historically
more or less the opposite of the Confucianist.

The Confucianist conception of Heavenly Power, vague though it tended to
be, bore a certain resemblance to the Middle Eastern, Old Testament image
of God. The Confucianists called it T'ien -"Sky," "Heaven," or "Supreme
Ruler." T'ien was seen as masculine, sometimes ferociously so. It needed
to be appeased with sacrifices and rituals. It took sides; it granted
authority. It transmitted sovereignty directly to the emperor, the Son of
Heaven. From him, dominion spread downward and outward-from the highest
officials to the lowest, from the major clans to the minor families. T'ien
was imagined as dazzling in appearance (hence the brilliant colors used by
the imperial family and the great clans). It was said to grant material
prosperity as a reward (hence the Confucianist equation of wealth with
goodness). In a word, it was considered awesome-something to fear, rather
than love (hence the emphasis on unquestioning obedience to superiors, and
the absence of words such as compassion from the Confucianist vocabulary).
Such was the image of Heavenly Power that Confucianists presented to the
common people. At the community level, it was shown in the courtroom
treatment of complainants, witnesses, and the accused, not one of whom was
allowed legal counsel or defense: All had to kneel on a hard floor
(sometimes on chains) before the magistrate, who, as the emperor's
representative in local government, had the right to extract testimony and
confessions by torture - and, since under Chinese law no criminal could be
sentenced until he had confessed, torture was the order of the day (hence
the development of Chinese Torture). Because of centuries of this sort of
intimidation, the^-majority of Chinese have tended to avoid whenever
possible the workings of official government. Unfortunately, this
Unwillingness to Openly Participate has allowed one tyrant after
another-including those of the present totalitarian bureaucracy-to gain
and maintain control of the nation.

Unlike the Confucianists, Taoists saw the Power of Heaven as both
masculine and feminine, as symbolized by the Taoist T'ai Chi-the circle
divided by ' a curved line into light and dark, or hale and female,
halves. Heavenly Power at work in the natural world, however-what Lao-tse
called "The Mother of Ten Thousand Things"-has always been seen by Taoists
as mostly feminine in its actions. It is gentle, like flowing water. It is
humble and generous, like a fertile valley, feeding all who come to it. It
is hidden, subtle, and mysterious, like a landscape glimpsed through mist.
It takes no sides, grants no authority. It cannot be influenced or
appeased by sacrifices and rituals. In dispensing justice, as in all
things, it operates with a light touch, an invisible hand. As Lao-tse put
it, "Heaven's net has wide meshes, but nothing slips through." Shying away
from displays of arrogance and egotism, it communicates its deepest
secrets not to high government officials, pompous scholars, or wealthy
landowners, but to penniless monks, little children, animals, and "fools."
If it can be said to be biased in any way, it is in favor of the humble,
the weak, the small.

And that brings us back to Piglet.

As anyone can see, there are disadvantages to being a Very Small Animal.
And one of those disadvantages is that bigger animals will try to take
advantage of you. For example, let's recall Rabbit's famous Plan to Kidnap
Baby Roo.

Practically as soon as Kanga and Roo arrived in the Forest, Rabbit decided
that they ought to leave. We're not sure why-Rabbits are like that,
sometimes. Anyway, Rabbit's plan involved-which in Rabbit terminology
means took advantage of Piglet and Pooh.

The idea was, Pooh would distract Kanga by talking to her, perhaps
reciting some of his poetry (which ought to distract anyone). And-Ouch!

"That was uncalled for, Pooh."

"Was it?" asked Pooh. "I thought I heard you calling it."

And while Kanga's attention was diverted, Rabbit would place Piglet in her
pouch-telling her it was Roo-and then run off with Roo. Afterward, when
Kanga had discovered that Roo was missing ... Then Rabbit, Pooh, and
Piglet-all three of them, mind you-would say "Aha!" very loudly. As Rabbit
explained it, a loud "Aha!" would mean that they had kidnapped Roo and
would give him back only if Kanga were to promise to leave the Forest and
never return. Kanga would grasp this meaning immediately, Rabbit said, as
soon as Rabbit, Pooh, and Piglet (all three, mind you) said "Aha!" It went
wrong-as Clever Plans by Rabbit always do-because first, Kangas think and
respond differently from Rabbits; and second, as things turned out there
was no loud, groupspoken "Aha!" to intimidate her, whether or not she
would have understood what it was supposed to mean, anyway.

The first part of the plan went smoothly enough. They came across Kanga
and Roo in the forest. Pooh distracted Kanga, Piglet jumped into Kanga's
pouch, and Rabbit ran off with Roo. Unsuspecting Kanga bounced home with
(bounce, bounce) Piglet (bounce, bounce, bounce). Pooh remained behind,
practicing (thud) Kanga-jumps (crash). It wasn't until Kanga reached her
house that the Trouble began:

Of course as soon as Kanga unbuttoned her pocket, she saw what had
happened. Just for a moment, she thought she was frightened, and then she
knew she wasn't; for she felt quite sure that Christopher Robin would
never let any harm happen to Roo. So she said to herself, "If they are
having a joke with me, I will have a joke with them."

"Now then, Roo, dear," she said as she took Piglet out of her pocket.
"Bed-time."

"Aha!" said Piglet, as well as he could after his Terrifying Journey. But
it wasn't a very good "Aha!" and Kanga didn't seem to understand what it
meant.

"Bath first," said Kanga in a cheerful voice.

"Aha!" said Piglet again, looking round anxiously for the others. But the
others weren't there....

"I am not at all sure," said Kanga in a thoughtful voice, "that it
wouldn't be a good idea to have a cold bath this evening. Would you like
that, Roo, dear?"

Whether Roo would have or not, Piglet didn't.

But at last, the Cold Bath was over . . . "Now," said Kanga, "there's your
medicine, and then bed."

"W-w-what medicine?" said Piglet.

"To make you grow big and strong, dear. You don't want to grow up small
and weak like Piglet, do you? Well, then!"

At that moment there was a knock at the door.

"Come in," said Kanga, and in came Christopher Robin.

"Christopher Robin, Christopher Robin!" cried Piglet. "Tell Kanga who I
am! She keeps saying I'm Roo. I'm not Roo, am I?"

Christopher Robin looked at him very carefully, and shook his head.

"You can't be Roo," he said, "because I've just seen Roo playing in
Rabbit's house."

"Well!" said Kanga. "Fancy that! Fancy my making a mistake like that."

"There you are!" said Piglet. "I told you so. I'm Piglet."

Christopher Robin shook his head again.

"Oh, you're not Piglet," he said. "I know Piglet well, and he's quite a
different color."

Piglet began to say that this was because he had just had a bath, and then
he thought that perhaps he wouldn't say that, and as he opened his mouth
to say something else, Kanga slipped the medicine spoon in, and then
patted him on the back and told him that it was really quite a nice taste
when you got used to it. What an ordeal. Well, that's what happens.

"Hey! What's dat noise outside?"

"Oh. Piglet's bodyguard. I'd forgotten you were here. It's some sort of
siren, I think. Let me take a look ... Yes-it's a police car."

"What?"

"That's strange. It's pulling up right in front of our house."

"Get away from dat window!"

"Of course. I didn't mean to-" Where'd he go? Excuse me. I have to answer
the door.

Little Piglet-held back by imaginings and fears, yearning to be Someone-is
the last animal one might expect to accomplish anything of importance. And
yet Piglet is the material from which heroes are made. Beneath the
stalwart exterior of most any Courageous Rescuer, Gallant Fighter, or
Great Achiever, a Piglet can be found, if one looks closely enough. So it
has always been, as history clearly shows; and so, we're sure, it will
always be.

In many ways, Piglet may appear the least significant of the Pooh
characters. Yet he is the only one of them to change, to grow, to become
more than what he was in the first place. And in the end, he does this not
by denying his smallness, but by applying it, for the good of others. He
accomplishes what he does without accumulating a Large Ego; inside, he
remains a Very Small Animal-but a different kind of Very Small Animal from
what he was before.

For now, though, he hesitates and dreams. He has a good deal to go through
before the Great Storm at the end of The House at Pooh Corner, which
changes his life forever.

"How would you sum up Piglet's situation at this point, Pooh?"

"With a song," said Pooh.

"Wonderful. I was hoping you would."

"(erhum) ..."

Animal so shy and small,

Dreaming you were Bold and Tall

You hesitate, all sensitive,

Waiting for a chance to Live.

Time is swift, it races by;

Opportunities are born and die ...

Still you wait and will not try

A bird with wings who dares not rise and fly.

But that You you want to see

Is not you,  and will never be.

No one else will ever do

The special things that wait inside of you.

You can be a guiding star,

If you make the most of Who You Are.

And the sensitivity

That you're now ashamed to see

Can be developed even more,

So you canfind the hidden doors

To places no one's been before.

And the pride you'll feel inside

Is not the kind that makes you fall

It's the kind that recognizes

The bigness found in being Small.

"Thank you, Pooh. That was excellent."

"Well," said Pooh, "it was better than I'd thought it would be. "

Along the way to developing and applying Sensitivity, there are things a
Piglet needs to watch out for. And one of them is found in the next
chapter.

THE EEYORE
EFFECT

"What's the matter, Piglet?" I asked.

"I was walking through the flowers just now," he said, "singing a little
song, when Eeyore came up.

"Oh. Eeyore. What happened?"

"He said, `Be careful, little Piglet-someone might pick you along with
those pansies and put you in a vase on the mantelpiece. And then what
would you do?' Then he walked away, chuckling to himself."

"Oh, don't mind Eeyore. He just likes to make others feel small,
especially if they're smaller than he is, anyway. That makes him look
big-he thinks. "

"I wouldn't mind his being miserable by himself, if he enjoys it so. But
why does he have to spread it around?"

There is something in each of us that wants us to be Unhappy. It creates
in our imaginations problems that don't yet exist-quite often causing them
to come true. It exaggerates problems that are already there. It
reinforces low self-esteem and lack of respect for others. It destroys
pride in workmanship, order, and cleanliness. It turns meetings into
Confrontations, expectations into Dread, opportunities into Danger,
stepping stones into Stumbling Blocks. It can be seen at work in grimaces
and frowns, which pull the muscles of the face forward and down, speeding
the aging process. It contaminates the mind behind the face with its
negative energy and spreads outward, like a disease. And then it comes
back, projected and reflected by other unhappy minds and faces. And on it
goes.

Norman Cousins, editor of the Saturday Review for over thirty years,
described the Eeyore Effect in an article he wrote following that
magazine's demise:

Whatever success the Saturday Review may have had was directly connected
to its respect for the place of ideas and the arts in the life of the
mind. This emphasis takes on special significance in the light of the
sleaziness that has infected the national culture in recent years. There
seems to be a fierce competition, especially in entertainment and
publishing, to find ever-lower rungs on the ladder of taste....

There is the curious notion that freedom is somehow synonymous with gutter
jargon. At one time people who worked in the arts would boast to one
another about their ability to communicate ideas that attacked social
injustice and brutality. Now some of them seem to feel that they have
struck a blow for humanity if only they can use enough four-letter
words....

The debasement of language not only reflects but produces a retreat from
civility. The slightest disagreement has become an occasion for violent
reactions. Television has educated an entire generation of Americans to
believe that the normal way of reacting to a slight is by punching someone
in the face.

The Eeyore Effect can be seen in every socially accepted negative
phenomenon, such as the growing number of elderly young people whose
governing philosophy seems to be: It Won't Work, So Why Try? Or in today's
Death Camp Chic fashions, and the popular Ugly-Skinny-Angry Look:

"Lobelia is dressed to kill or be killed in this stunning black leather
ensemble positively glowing with terrorist charm. It's the look, the
appeal, the special touch that says Harley-Davidson. Put away that knife,
Lobelia! For heaven's sake! Somebody, please-take it from her before she
causes some real harm."

The original Eeyore had at least a certain grim sense of humor, a sort of
funnyness-with-its-lightsturned-out. Latter-day Eeyores seem to be missing
that. One thing they do have, however, is fear. Eeyores are afraid-afraid
to risk positive emotional expression, positive action, positive
involvement in anything beyond Ego. Those things are stupid, they say, and
they don't want to look stupid. (They don't seem to mind looking Paralyzed
with Fear-they just don't want to look stupid.) Unfortunately for those
around them, complaining is one thing that Eeyores are not afraid to do.
They grudgingly carry their thimbles to the Fountain of Life, then mumble
and grumble that they weren't given enough.

"Hallo, Eeyore," said Christopher Robin, as he opened the door and came
out. "How are you?"

"It's snowing still," said Eeyore gloomily. "So it is."

"And freezing."

"Is it?"

"Yes," said Eeyore. "However," he said, brightening up a little, "we
haven't had an earthquake lately."

Eeyores are Realists, they say. But reality is what one makes it. And the
more negative reality one nurtures and creates, the more of it one has.
Eeyores see only what they want to . . . For example, never before in
history has the individual had so much power, and so many opportunities to
effect change. That assertion can be easily verified by taking a good look
around. But the Eeyore Effect makes a great many people believe that they
are powerless. And because they believe they're powerless, they are.

"I don't know how it is, Christopher Robin, but what with all this snow
and one thing and another, not to mention icicles and such-like, it isn't
so Hot in my field about three o'clock in the morning...."

Without difficulties, life would be like a stream without rocks and
curves-about as interesting as concrete. Without problems, there can be no
personal growth, no group achievement, no progress for humanity. But what
matters about problems is what one does with them. Eeyores don't overcome
problems. No, it's the other way around.

"And I said to myself: The others will be sorry if I'm getting myself all
cold. They haven't got Brains, any of them, only grey fluff that's blown
into their heads by mistake, and they don't Think, but if it goes on
snowing for another six weeks or so, one of them will begin to say to
himself: 'Eeyore can't be so very much too Hot about three o'clock in the
morning.' And then it will Get About. And they'll be Sorry."

Eeyores, in other words, are Whiners. They believe the negative but not
the positive and are so obsessed with What's Wrong that the Good Things in
Life pass them by unnoticed. Are they the ones, then, to give us an
accurate account of what life is about? If the universe were governed by
the Eeyore Attitude, the whole thing would have collapsed eons ago.
Everything in creation, from migrating hummingbirds to spinning planets,
operates on the belief that It Can Be Done. To quote William Blake, "If
the Sun and Moon should Doubt / They'd immediately Go Out."

Therefore, no society that wants to last is going to be guided by Eeyores.
For Eeyores sneer at the very things that are needed most for survival and
prosperity. As Lao-tse wrote:

When they hear of the Way,

The highest minds practice it;

The average minds think about it

And try it now and then;

The lowest minds laugh at it.

If they did not laugh at it,

It would not be the Way.

Pardon me a moment. This letter just arrived.

"Fan mail for Pooh, I suppose," said Piglet enviously.

"For me?" said Pooh, waking up suddenly.

"No, it's ... Hmm. I'll read it to you."

"Dear Sir:

"It has come to my attention that in your trifling book, The Tao of Pooh,
you fail to mention a single positive attribute of that most charming of
the A. A. Milne characters. I refer, of course, to the loveable Eeyore.

"It is beyond my understanding how anyone could overlook the merits of the
affable, debonair, and instigorating FOR Eeyore. His wit and wisdom can
serve as an example to all in these dark days that envelop us."

"Dark?" said Pooh, looking out the window. "Where?"

"That's just a figure of speech, Pooh."

"Oh. One of those."

"He must have been in the dark when he wrote it," said Piglet, studying
the letter.

"Do you mean the writing? It is pretty awful.

But to continue . . . "

"Yes, in these times of tedium and ineptitude, it is refreshing-and
encouraging-to know that there exists such a valuable, admirable, and
humble animal as Eeyore.

"A Friend

"P.S. Don't do it again."

Well, now we've heard from-er, whoever it was who sent this letter. I have
a feeling that we'll hear from him again.

Let's look at some Eeyores Around Us. We will begin with what we call the
Negative News Media. As Henry David Thoreau wrote, in Walden:

I am sure that Inever read any memorable news in a newspaper. If we read
of one man robbed, or murdered, or killed by accident, or one house
burned, or one vessel wrecked, or one steamboat blown up, or one cow run
over on the Western Railroad, or one mad dog killed, or one lot of
grasshoppers in the winter - we never need read of another. One is enough.

Today, thanks to the Negative News Media, we are overinformed about
problems we can do little or nothing about. Despite the great fanfare made
about these problems, few of them have much of anything to do with our
lives. When it comes to those that do-such as the matter of what the local
Nuclear Power Plant is doing to our health-the media are quite often
silent. Strange. The Negative News Media rarely tell us of problems we can
do something about, and never tell us what we can do about them. That
would give us an unfair advantage, we suppose.

The Negative News Media sneer at everything and everyone, and call that
Objectivity. Although there are courageous, noble-minded investigators and
communicators in the news business, all too many of the rest behave like
Peeping Toms with notebooks and cameras, who seem more interested in
destroying heroes than in exposing villains. If the media build up some
individuals in the public eye, it seems to be for the purpose of rubbing
their remains in the public eye later on, in order to sell automobiles and
toothpaste.

The heroes have flaws, we're told. Like Tigger, they can climb up but not
down; their tails get in the way. So-and-So is just an ordinary man, after
all. (That's a crime?) Such-and-Such is a crook. For some reason, however,
the negative newsmongers tend to ignore the doings of the Biggest Crooks
in the Highest Places-the ones who cause the greatest damage. Last month's
Admirable People are now in disgrace and will quickly fade from sight. A
new set will pop up in the latest broadcast or magazine issue, like
targets in a shooting gallery. They in turn will be gunned down, and so
on. The engineering of this process reminds us of some other words of
William Blake: "A Truth that's told with bad intent / Beats all the Lies
you can invent. "

In reality, heroes are heroic because they, despite their weaknesses-and
sometimes because of them-do great things. If they were perfect, they
wouldn't be here in earth's classroom. Their strengths and weaknesses
could be presented in an objective manner, for the enlightenment of
others. But that's not what the Negative News Media do. Instead, they
focus on the flaws in the most sensational manner, in order to make
themselves wealthy. Who is going to take a chance at doing anything more
than the mediocre, and help others to do the same, knowing that the
Negative News Media are awaiting an opportunity to bring him crashing to
the ground before an audience of millions?

Just as important, what effect does this constant character assassination
have on that audience itself? To quote further from Henry David Thoreau
...

If I am to be a thoroughfare, I prefer that it be of the mountain brooks,
the Parnassian streams, and not the town sewers. There is inspiration,
that gossip which comes to the ear of the attentive mind from the courts
of heaven. There is the pro fane and stale revelation of the barroom and
the police court. The same ear is fitted to receive both communications. .
. . We should treat our minds, that is, ourselves, as innocent and
ingenuous children, whose guardians we are, and be careful what objects
and what subjects we thrust on their attention. Read not the Times. Read
the Eternities.

Oops. Here he comes.

"Has anybody heard the news?" asked Eeyore, walking gloomily into the
room.

"What is it now?" said I.

"Disaster. Horrendous, unspeakable disaster."

"I thought that was yesterday. Or the day before."

"It's in all the papers," said Eeyore, ignoring me as best he could.

"At what time does the earth explode?" I inquired, turning to look at the
clock.

"Very amusing," said Eeyore. "In a pathetic sort of way."

"And when," I asked, "is the sun going dead?"

"Ha, ha. It's just what you would say. The sun going dead. Only don't
blame me if it doesn't."

"All right, I won't. But I might blame you if it does. "

All this about newspapers, gossip, and such brings us to those classic
Eeyore killjoys and spoilsports known as The Critics. You know what they
are, whether they be professional Reputation Smashers or the Old Grump
next door. If you sing, they can sing better (even though they can't
sing). If you dance, they can dance better (even though they can't dance).
If you direct a theater production, they can direct better (even though
they can't direct). Whatever you do, they can do it better, even though
they can't do it as well as you can. And since they can't do it as well as
you, it shouldn't be particularly surprising if they don't accurately
judge it. Whether in condemning Works of Genius or in praising the Truly
Awful, The Critics tend to be wrong a disturbingly large amount of the
time. Yet they can have tremendous influence, just the same. And that
influence is responsible for the tragic loss of much that would have been
of benefit to the world.

Chuang-tse described the limitations of The Critics in his story about a
know-it-all quail:

There is a great bird known as the P'eng. Its back appears as broad as a
mountain range; its wings are like clouds across the sky. It rises up like
a whirlwind until it breaks through the high mist and soars into the
infinite blue. As it glides effortlessly along on its journey to the sea,
a quail in the marsh looks up at it and laughs. "What does that bird think
it's doing?" says the quail. "I jump up and fly a few feet; then I come
down and flutter from here to there in the bushes. That is what flying is
for! Who is that creature trying to fool?"

... So it is that the knowledge of the smallminded cannot reach to that
which is great, just as the experience of a few years cannot equal that of
many. The mushroom of a morning knows not what takes place at the end of
the month; the short-lived cicada has no awareness of what happens in the
seasons beyond.

Our favorite story about The Critics was told to us a few years ago by
someone-or-other, who'd heard it who-knows-where:

While traveling separately through the countryside late one afternoon, a
Hindu, a Rabbi, and a Critic were caught in the same area by a terrific
thunderstorm. They sought shelter at a nearby farmhouse.

"That storm will be raging for hours," the farmer told them. "You'd better
stay here for the night. The problem is, there's only room enough for two
of you. One of you'll have to sleep in the barn."

"I'll be the one," said the Hindu. "A little hardship is nothing to me."
He went out to the barn.

A few minutes later, there was a knock at the door. It was the Hindu. "I'm
sorry," he told the others, "but there is a cow in the barn. According to
my religion, cows are sacred, and one must not intrude into their space."

"Don't worry," said the Rabbi. "Make yourself comfortable here. I'll go to
sleep in the barn." He went out to the barn.

A few minutes later, there was a knock at the door. It was the Rabbi. "I
hate to be a bother," he said, "but there is a pig in the barn. In my
religion, pigs are considered unclean. I wouldn't feel comfortable sharing
my sleeping quarters with a pig."

"Oh, all right," said the Critic. "I'll go sleep in the barn." He went out
to the barn.

A few minutes later, there was a knock at the door. It was the cow and the
pig.

The Critics can be pretty intimidating, all right. One can't do or say
much of anything without fear of offending this particular-very
particular-type of Eeyore. If you do or say the wrong thing (or the right
thing), you may find yourself ostracized. But being Ostracized by Eeyores
has its advantages. At least you don't have to associate with-

"Ostrich-sized?" said Pooh. "How can you be ostrich-sized? Unless you're
an ostrich."

"No, not ostrich-sized. Ostracized."

"That's rather large, isn't it?" said Piglet.

"They're such very big birds."

"No-not ostrich-sized. Ostracized."

"They are big birds," said Owl. "Now look here, all of you-"

"In fact, the male of the genus Struthio can attain a height of eight feet
and a weight of three hundred pounds. As one might imagine, they can be
quite dangerous when angered, and-"

Excuse me while I take this material into another room.

It was the first party to which Roo had ever been, and he was very
excited. As soon as ever they had sat down he began to talk.

"Hallo, Pooh!" he squeaked. "Hallo, Roo!" said Pooh.

Roo jumped up and down in his seat for a little while and then began
again.

"Hallo, Piglet!" he squeaked.

Piglet waved a paw at him, being too busy to say anything.

"Hallo, Eeyorel" said Roo.

Eeyore nodded gloomily at him. "It will rain soon, you see if it doesn't."

Next we come to the Educator Eeyores, whose idea of teaching is impress
the maximum number of Unpleasant Things upon children at the minimum
possible age. Perhaps in the past these Eeyores were stepped on once too
often by the Heel of Fortune and now want to take out their frustrations
on people smaller than they are. Perhaps they truly believe that their
approach to teaching is the best (despite the fact that few of their
graduating students can even spell, or punctuate a sentence). We don't
know. But we do know that their approach to education works against
natural laws at practically every step of the way.

Mentally, emotionally, and physically, the human being is designed for a
long childhood, followed by a short adolescence and then adulthood-the
state of responsible, self-reliant wholeness. What we see children
experiencing now, however, is an ever-shorter childhood, followed by a
premature, prolonged adolescence from which ever fewer seem to be
emerging.

Rather than help children develop the abilities needed to overcome the
difficulties immediately confronting them, in the natural order in which
they need to develop them, the Eeyore Educational System (with a good deal
of help from parents and the entertainment industry) is forcing too much
inappropriate information on them too soon, concerning-and
causing-problems they can do nothing about. Then the children get stuck.

In response to the declining Test Scores of recent years, the educational
system has brought in vastly expensive machines to do the teachinga sign
of trouble if there ever was one. Learn to write from a computer, and so
on. (Of course, it could have brought in people who knew how to write, or
whatever, to teach how to write, or whatever-on a volunteer basis, if
necessary. But that would have been too simple, we suppose. Cheating,
almost.) Now this costly Teaching Technology is bankrupting the system.
So, in order to Cut Costs, the Eeyores are eliminating what they consider
unnecessary classes-Art, Creative Writing, Drama, and so on-classes that
help students observe, reason, and communicate, as well as keep their
spirits and the right sides of their brains alive.

The Eeyore Educational System sees childhood as a waste of time, a luxury
that society cannot afford. Its response to the problems of vanishing
childhood is to speed up the process-give the students more information,
give it to them at a faster rate, and give it to them sooner. Put children
in school at the earliest age possible; load them down

with homework; take away their time, their creativity, their play, their
power; then plug them into machines. That'll whip them into shape. Well,
it'll whip them, anyway.

Over two thousand years ago, Chuang-tse described a similar situation:

The ancient emperor Shun encouraged rivalry in the minds of the people.
Children were born the usual number of months after conception; but five
months after that, they were being taught to converse. Soon they were
calling people by their titles and personal names. Then men began to die
while still young....

This governing provided order in name only. In reality, it produced chaos.
It ran contrary to the light of the sun and the moon, brought harm to the
mountains and rivers, and poisoned the fruit of the four seasons. It
proved more deadly than the sting of a scorpion, or the bite of a
dangerous beast.

The more that children are Educated by Eeyores, the more problems they
develop. And the more problems they develop, the more the Eeyores insist
on Educating them, at an ever-earlier

age. The Educator Eeyores' answer to the problems that the Eeyores create
is: Crack Down. The children's response is: Crack Up.

Piglet had got up early that morning to pick himself a bunch of violets;
and when he had picked them and put them in a pot in the middle of his
house, it suddenly came over him that nobody had ever picked Eeyore a
bunch of violets, and the more he thought of this, the more he thought how
sad it was to be an Animal who had never had a bunch of violets picked for
him. So he hurried out again, saying to himself, "Eeyore, Violets," and
then "Violets, Eeyore," in case he forgot, because it was that sort of
day, and he picked a large bunch and trotted along, smelling them, and
feeling very happy, until he came to the place where Eeyore was.

"Oh, Eeyore," began Piglet a little nervously, because Eeyore was busy.

Eeyore put out a paw and waved him away.

"Tomorrow," said Eeyore. "Or the next day."

Like the Iron Fist educators just mentioned, the following Eeyores work
against natural laws and then complain about the results. In their
behavior, they might be said to personify the opposite of the Taoist
belief that the masculine and feminine earth energies need to be. kept in
balance, and that when the masculine is excessive the feminine needs to be
advanced.

The rather Severe people we're thinking of might be called the Eeyore
Amazons. They are emotionally descended from the Puritans-those grim souls
who considered femininity No Good, along with art, music, dancing,
singing, the natural world, and practically everything else that makes
life enjoyable. As do a number of other people (us included), the Eeyore
Amazons call themselves feminists. But the word doesn't quite fit them,
somehow. They don't like femininity. Instead, they covet masculinity.
Strange. Very strange.

Rather like certain joggers who are so automobile-oriented that they run
on asphalt highways, gulping down noxious gases with every breath, the
Eeyore Amazons are so masculinity-oriented that they think of success,
power, and all that in aggressive, combative masculine terms.

And so, just when a good many of us men have discarded
earth-family-and-society-damaging machismo, along come the Eeyore Amazons,
cursing and plundering like pirates in a bad Hollywood movie. Not exactly
what we would call Advancing the Feminine. Yet even as they imitate and
increase the worst sort of masculine energy, they denounce practically
everything they dislike as masculine and a threat-to the extent of seeing
masculinity and threats that aren't there. Stranger and stranger.

For example, the Amazons want to eliminate what they call the "masculine"
(neutral) nouns, pronouns, and adjectives of the English language because,
they say, these words are demeaning to women. Then they substitute words
that are demeaning to everyone.

First, they made us change chairman to chairperson - which meant the same
thing as chairman, only it was harder to say, longer to write, and just a
bit silly. After a while, recognizing that chairperson was indeed rather
awkward and stupid, they made us change it to chair. You know what a chair
is. It's a thing. You sit on it.

So now Plain English has been turned into patronizing Lawyer-Politicianese
...

If a person does not keep pace with his or her companions, perhaps it is
because he or she hears a different drummer [or drummerette?]. Let him, or
her, step to the music which he, or she, hears, however measured or far
away.

. . . and equally nonsensical Pluralspeak:

If a person does not keep pace with their companions, perhaps it is
because they hear a different drummer.

For a classic example of what Eeyore Politicizing can do to a language,
here's a not-so-brief-anymore passage from the "improved" Oregon Revised
Statutes-one of many such passages rewritten to avoid "masculine" terms
and voted into law:

(a) When owned or leased by a farmer and used in transporting the farmer's
own agricultural commodities, agricultural products or livestock ... that
were originally grown or raised by the farmer on the farm of the farmer,
or when used in any transportation which is incidental to the regular
operation of the farm of the farmer, or when used to transport supplies,
equipment or materials to the farm of the farmer that are con

sumed or used on the farm of the farmer.

When all the books and so on have been censored and rewritten to suit the
Eeyore Amazons, precisely what will have been accomplished? And why are
words so important to them, anyway? For example, if they marry, they
reject their husbands' family names. These names are paternal and are
therefore symbols of "male chauvinism," they say. So they keep their
unmarried names-which came from their fathers. (And their fathers were
strong advocates of women's rights?)

Behind their antimasculine words, it's Overmasculinity as Usual, as the
Eeyore Amazons imitate the lowest sort of masculine behavior and further
the very energy they criticize. They break up Men's Clubs, which, they
say, mean discrimination. Then they establish Women's Clubs, in which no
men are allowed. They accuse men of being Sexists. Then they behave like
Sexists. They say they want Sensitive Men. When they encounter such men,
they shove them about. To put it plainly, their New Woman wants to be like
the Old Man. And maybe even worse.

In a world that's practically screaming for relief from the Heavy Hand of
Hypermasculinity, the Eeyore Amazons give us More of the Same. Who needs
it? Countering Hypermasculinity with Hypermasculinity is rather like
dousing a fire by pouring gasoline on it. You can't beat sensitivity into
people. But you can beat it out of them.

Into what sort of future, and what sort of world, are the Eeyore Amazons
pushing us? Where is respect for the feminine going? As anyone can see,
women are being Used and Abused more than ever. Never have they been
portrayed so demeaningly in movies, television shows, magazines, and
books. And, according to statistics, the feminine side of the work force
is not being paid as much for its efforts as it was twenty years ago. The
influence of the Eeyore Amazons may not exactly be setting femininity
Free, but it is making it Remarkably Cheap.

If truth be told, respect for the feminine is sinking like the
Titanic-and, consequently, so is the state of the earth, the family, and
society. The Eeyore Amazons blame men for all this. They might be wiser to
blame misguided, excessive masculine energy-including that which they are
advancing.

When the original Titanic went down, it was Women and Children First into
the lifeboats. Now it's Women and Children Last. As a young man explained
to us after a particularly nasty remark to his secretary, "We don't have
to be nice to them anymore.

As do Eeyores in general, the Eeyore Amazons want men to stop being
Chivalrous (not that many are now, anyway). Chivalry is Patronizing and
Demeaning to Women, they say. But is it? And is chivalry limited to the
behavior of men toward women? Whether of the European or the Asian
variety, the code of chivalry makes kindness, consideration, and respect
fashionable, and makes it admirable and desirable for the advantaged to
assist the disadvantaged. Without chivalry, it's Claw and Fang, Might
Makes Right, Kill or Be Killed. So we, along with past Taoist writers,
knights-errant, and forest outlaws, would say: If you do away with
chivalry, and do away with the feminine, Watch Out.

To close this chapter, we would like to quote from Hope Against Hope: A
Memoir, in which Nadezhda Mandelstam described the Eeyore Effect at work
in Stalinist Russia. Unfortunately, the principle involved is not limited
to another society at another time, but is universal and ever-present:

There were once many kind people, and even unkind ones pretended to be
good because that was the thing to do. Such pretense was the source of the
hypocrisy and dishonesty so much exposed in the realist literature at the
end of the last century. The unexpected result of this kind of critical
writing was that kind people disappeared. Kindness is not, after all, an
inborn quality-it has to be cultivated, and this only happens when it is
in demand. For our generation, kindness was an old-fashioned, vanished
quality, and its exponents were as extinct as the mammoth. Everything we
have seen in our times-the ... class warfare, the constant "unmasking" of
people, the search for an ulterior motive behind every action-all this has
taught us to be anything you like except kind.

How can one begin to overcome the Eeyore Within, and thereby begin to
counteract the Eeyore Effect? We will get to that in a moment. But first
.. .

THE TIGGER TENDENCY

It seems appropriate to begin this chapter with the Chinese story of "The
Foolhardy Tiger":

A large tiger was swaggering through the forest. Above his head, a small
bird danced from branch to branch, singing. The tiger stopped and watched
him. Then he called out:

"What do you have to dance and sing about, you puny being? I am a thousand
times larger than you. I can crush you in one paw, without even trying!"

"Can you do this?" replied the bird, hopping lightly from one branch to
another.

"Of course I can!" roared the tiger. "Anything you can do, I can do
better!"

He leaped onto the trunk, climbed high into the tree, then jumped out onto
a branch. With a loud crack, it broke beneath his weight. So did the
branches below it, all the way down. Ever so slowly, the bruised, rumpled
tiger rose to his feet and staggered away. Limping out of the woods, the
tiger came to the edge of a field. There he saw a small, furry animal with
weak eyes and funny-looking feet. At least, that's how they seemed to the
tiger, who roared with laughter, forgetting his pain.

"What are you laughing at?" asked the mole, looking up at him.

"What odd little feetl" laughed the tiger. "And such weak little eyes!"

"I can see what I need to see," replied the mole. "and I can go where I
need to go."

"Ho, ho, ho!" laughed the tiger. "I can do both of those things much
better than you!"

"All right," said the mole. "Let's see you get past all those workers out
there in the field."

He disappeared down a hole, and shortly popped up from another hole beyond
the farthest field hand.

"Here I come!" whooped the tiger, as he bounded into the field.

How the workers shouted! What heavy tools they swung! What large rocks
they threw! The scarred, battered tiger stumbled back the way he had come,
barely escaping with his life. After a while, he came to a swamp. And
there he noticed a tiny, slow-moving creature with a curly shell on his
back.

"What a useless little thing!" exclaimed the tiger. "No legs at all!"

"What do I need legs for?" asked the snail. "There are many places legs
cannot go."

"Where?" asked the incredulous tiger.

"Across this swamp, for example," replied the snail.

"Nonsense!" thundered the tiger. "I can cross it in an instant, by jumping
from log to log!"

And without a moment's hesitation, he leaped for the nearest log.
Unfortunately, he was too heavy for that sort of thing, and fell short.
The snail slid slowly across on the grasses of the swamp, leaving the
struggling tiger far behind.

"Talking is one thing," he remarked to himself. "Doing is another."

In this chapter, we look at Eeyore's Opposite-an animal who believes in
everything and believes that everything is Something He Can Do. All things
are possible to a Tigger, at least until he tries them.

"How did you get there, Roo?" asked Piglet.

"On Tigger's back! And Tiggers can't climb downwards, because their tails
get in the way, only upwards, and Tigger forgot about that when we
started, and he's only just remembered. So we've got to stay here for ever
and ever-unless we go higher. What did you say, Tigger? Oh, Tigger says if
we go higher we shan't be able to see Piglet's house so well, so we're
going to stop here."

As anyone who's been around one knows, Tiggers are first-rate at starting
things, but are not very good at completing them. Life is always greener
elsewhere to a Tigger once he's started something, and the Endless
Possibilities constantly beckon-especially when he gets himself into a
difficult situation, which is one thing Tiggers do quite easily.

... Tigger was holding on to the branch and saying to himself: "[Jumping
down]'s all very well for jumping Animals like Kangas, but it's quite
different for Swimming Animals like Tiggers." And he thought of himself
floating on his back down a river, or striking out from one island to
another, and he felt that that was really the life for a Tigger.

"Come along," called Christopher Robin. "You'll be all right."

"Just wait a moment," said Tigger nervously....

"Come on, it's easy!" squeaked Roo. And suddenly Tigger found how easy it
was.

"Ow!" he shouted as the tree flew past him.

There's nothing wrong with being an Enthusiast. If it were not for
enthusiasts, there would be no Major Advances in life, and very little
excitement. But enthusiasts are more than Tiggers. They soon become well
enough acquainted with whatever they're enthusiastic about to know when
not to put their foot in it. Tigger is an overenthusiast. (And what he
accomplishes is anybody's guess.)

In The House at Pooh Corner, Piglet described Tigger as "a Very Bouncy
Animal, with a way of saying How-do-you-do, which always left your ears
full of sand, even after Kanga had said, `Gently, Tigger dear,' and had
helped you up again." Rabbit described him as "the sort of Tigger who was
always in front when you were showing him the way anywhere, and was
generally out of sight when at last you came to the place and said proudly
`Here we are!' " Alexander Pope described him quite nicely when he wrote:
"Some people never learn anything because they understand everything too
quickly." A psychiatrist might describe him as "an impulse-driven
personality." We would describe him as an animal with a whim of iron and
the inner discipline of mush.

While the Teachings of the West tend to encourage Tigger's sort of
behavior, the Teachings of the East contain many cautions against it. In
the Tao Te Ching, for example, we find:

High winds do not blow all morning;

Heavy rain does not fall all day.

Are not these made by heaven and earth?

If the power of heaven and earth

Cannot make violent activity last,

How can you?

Standing on tiptoe, one is unsteady.

Taking long steps, one quickly tires.

Showing off, one shows unenlightenment.

Displaying self-righteousness, one reveals vanity.

Praising the self, one earns no respect.

Exaggerating achievements, one cannot long endure.

Followers of the Way consider these

Extra food, unnecessary baggage.

They bring no happiness.

Therefore, followers of the Way

Avoid them.

Do not conquer the world with force,

For force only causes resistance.

Thorns spring up when an army passes.

Years of misery follow a great victory.

Do only what needs to be done,

Without using violence.

It is not wise to dash about.

Shortening the breath causes stress.

Use too much energy, and You will soon be exhausted.

That is not the Natural Way.

Whatever works against Tao

Will not last long.

"Going out, are you, Tigger?"

"Yes," he replied. "Roo and I are going on a picnic. I'm bringing the
sandwiches."

"Oh? What's in that one?"

"Peanut butter, onions, mustard, and cheese." "Oh. I ... Er ..."

"Is anything the matter?" asked Tigger. "You've gone green.

"No, it's nothing . . . Nothing at all. I'll be all right. I hope you're
not going far."

"Why?" asked Tigger.

"Oh, just in case we have to bring Roo back suddenly."

"What for?"

"Nothing, nothing. Run along and enjoy yourselves. While you can."

Well, it takes all kinds to make a mess.

The West is full of Tiggers-restless seekers of instant gratification,
larger-than-life overachievers. The West idolizes them because they're
Bouncy and Exciting. Maybe even a bit too exciting. And they're becoming
more exciting all the time. It seems that it's no longer adequate to be a
True Individual, or even a Hero; now one needs to be some sort of
Superman, living an overinflated life punctuated (in true Tigger fashion)
with exclamation marks. Faster than a speeding bullet! More powerful than
a locomotive! Able to leap tall buildings in a single bound! This is the
age of Supereverything-Superstar, Superathlete, Supercoach,
Superpolitician, even Superbusinessman: Faster than a speeding ticket!
More powerful than a profit motive! Able to lease  tall buildings in a
single day!

Tiggers are not necessarily what they seem, however. While they may appear
to be selfpropelled, they are in reality jerked this way and that by
whatever immediately appealing object or sensation catches their
attention. And while Tiggers may appear energetic to the extreme, their
love of ceaseless action and sensation is actually a form of spiritual
laziness. Tiggers are not in control of their lives, as is clearly shown
by their behavior.

Unfortunately, it is quite easy to be an impatient, inconsiderate,
scatterbrained Tigger in a society that admires, encourages, and rewards
impulsive behavior. Advertisements tell us to buy whatever-it-is and Spoil
ourselves. An appropriate word, spoil. We deserve it, they say. (Maybe we
do, but we'd like to think we're better than that.) Store layouts are
carefully designed to encourage impulse buying. Movies, television shows,
and magazines promote impulsive behavior of the most questionable kind, in
the most flash-it-in-theirfaces manner. Practically everything from
hairstyles to life-styles is endorsed as some sort of drug to be taken Now
for Instant Relief. If you have this model of automobile, this style of
clothing, this shape of girlfriend, or this sort of romantic entanglement,
you will be happy. You will be loved. You will be Somebody. Those who
can't have such things are doomed to frustration. Those who can have them
are doomed to the inevitable disappointment. As Oscar Wilde put it, "In
the world there are only two tragedies. One is not getting what one wants
and the other is getting it." We are reminded of the old Persian curse:
"May your every desire be immediately fulfilled."

In chapter twelve of the Tao Te Ching, Laotse described what's wrong with
Tigger's sensationalistic approach to life:

The five colors blind the eye.

The five tones deafen the ear.

The five flavors deaden the tongue.

Racing and hunting madden the mind.

While America is in many  ways becoming Eeyore Country, in other ways it
is turning into Tiggerland. A truly schizophrenic situation, one might
say. The minds of American children are now so stressed and crippled by
Tiggerish whambam Video Games, Television Shows, and Instant Left-Brain
Computer Activities that many of them are unable to concentrate on
anything for more than five minutes. As an ever-growing number of teachers
are finding out, educating such minds is impossible. If something can't be
immediately grasped, they won't understand it. And if it can be
immediately grasped, they won't understand it, either-because Instant
Information Accumulation is not understanding.

Perhaps today's children will be able to find employment years from now,
anyway-they may be hired as technical laborers by the Chinese, Japanese,
and Koreans, who will by then own just about everything because their
cultures far more than ours encourage children to Focus the Mind.

The major lesson Tiggers need to learn is that if they don't control their
impulses, their impulses will control them. No matter how much they do,
Tiggers are never satisfied because they don't know the feeling of
accomplishment that eventually comes when one persistently applies one's
will to the attaining of not-immediately-reachable goals. The principle of
this sort of achievement can be illustrated by the following story by
Chuang-tse:

K'ung Fu-tse and his followers were on their way to the state of Ch'u. As
they emerged from a forest, they came upon a hunchback catching cicadas on
the end of a stick as they flew by.

"How skillful!" exclaimed the Master, stopping to watch. "Sir, what is
your method?"

"At first," the man answered, "I practiced balancing pellets on this
stick. After five or six months, I could handle two until they never fell
down. Then I failed with only a few of the insects. I went on to three
pellets. After that, I missed only one cicada in ten. By the time I could
manipulate five pellets, I was catching cicadas without effort.

When I focus my attention, my body becomes no more than a stump, and my
arm the branch of a tree. Heaven and earth are great, and the ten thousand
things multiply around me-but I pay no attention to them, only to the
wings of the cicadas. My mind does not waver; my body maintains its
balance. With such an attitude, how can I fail?"

K'ung Fu-tse turned and said to his disciples, "Remember the saying of
old: `When one's will is not distracted, one's power is increased.' How
well has this gentleman demonstrated the truth of that today!"

Something else that Tiggers need to learn is found in the Japanese story
of "The Samurai and the Zen Master":

A certain samurai had a reputation for impatient  and hot-tempered
behavior. A Zen master, well known for his excellent cooking, decided that
the warrior needed to be taught a lesson before he became any more
dangerous. He invited the samurai to dinner. The samurai arrived at the
appointed time. The Zen master told him to make himself comfortable while
he finished preparing the food. A long time passed. The samurai waited
impatiently.

After a while, he called out: "Zen Master-have you forgotten me?"

The Zen master came out of the kitchen. "I am very sorry," he said.
"Dinner is taking longer to prepare than I had thought." He went back to
the kitchen. A long time passed.

The samurai sat, growing hungrier by the minute. At last he called out, a
little softer this time: "Zen Master-please. When will dinner be served?"

The Zen master came out of the kitchen. "I'm sorry. There has been a
further delay. It won't be much longer." He went back to the kitchen. A
long time passed. Finally, the samurai couldn't endure the waiting any
longer. He rose to his feet, chagrined and ravenously hungry. Just then,
the Zen master entered the room with a tray of food. First he served miso
shiru (soybean soup). The samurai gratefully drank the soup, enchanted by
its flavor.

"Oh, Zen Master," he exclaimed, "this is the finest miso shiru I have ever
tasted! You truly deserve your reputation as an expert cook!"

"It's nothing," replied the Zen master, modestly. "Only miso shiru."

The samurai set down his empty bowl. "Truly magical soup! What secret
spices did you use to bring out the flavor?"

"Nothing special," the Zen master replied.

"No, no-I insist. The soup is extraordinarily delicious!"

"Well, there is one thing ..."

"I knew it!" exclaimed the samurai, eagerly leaning forward. "There had to
be something to make it taste so good! Tell me-what is it?"

The Zen master softly spoke: "It took time," he said.

"Tell me, Kanga-how has it been at your house since Tigger's been staying
there?"

"Oh, it's been ... interesting."

"How do you mean?"

"Well, just yesterday morning, he knocked down the postman. "

"Disgusting," said Owl, who had flown over to listen. "Absolutely
disgusting."

"Why did he knock down the postman?"

"He thought he was taking something."

"Oh. "

"Disgusting. "

"You see, the postman carries a large sack-"

"Yes, yes. I hope Tigger apologized."

"He did. After I explained the situation."

"That's good."

"The postman was certainly decent about it."

"Oh? What did he say?"

"He said he'd been knocked down many a time by dogs - but never before by
a cat."

The final problem we might mention about the Tigger Tendency is that the
worthwhile and important things in life-wisdom and happiness in
particular-are simply not the sorts of things one can Chase After and
Grab. They are instead the sorts of things that come to us where we are,
if we let them-if we stop trying too hard and just let things happen as
they need to. Tigger found this out in spite of himself when he discovered
What Tiggers Like Best, in the second chapter of The

House at Pooh Corner.

Tigger had just come to the Forest and needed breakfast. So Pooh offered
him some honey-being sure to ask, of course, if Tiggers like honey. "They
like everything," Tigger cheerful assured him. But it didn't take Tigger
long to realize that ...

"Tiggers don't like honey."

"Oh!" said Pooh, and tried to make it sound Sad and Regretful. "I thought
they liked everything."

"Everything except honey," said Tigger.

Pooh felt rather pleased about this, and said that, as soon as he had
finished his own breakfast, he would take Tigger round to Piglet's house,
and Tigger could try some of Piglet's haycorns.

"Thank you, Pooh," said Tigger, "because haycorns is really what Tiggers
like best."

So they went to see Piglet.

"Hallo, Piglet. This is Tigger."

"Oh, is it?" said Piglet, and he edged round to the other side of the
table. "I thought Tiggers were smaller than that."

"Not the big ones," said Tigger.

"They like haycorns," said Pooh, "so that's what we've come for, because
poor Tigger hasn't had any breakfast yet."

Piglet pushed the bowl of haycorns towards Tigger, and said: "Help
yourself," and then he got close up to Pooh and felt much braver, and
said, "So you're Tigger? Well, well!" in a careless sort of voice. But
Tigger said nothing because his mouth was full of haycorns ...

After a long munching noise he said: "Ee-ers o i a-ors."

And when Pooh and Piglet said "What?" he said "Skoos ee," and went outside
for a moment.

When he came back he said firmly: "Tiggers don't like haycorns."

"But you said they liked everything except honey," said Pooh.

"Everything except honey and haycorns," explained Tigger.

When he heard this, Pooh said, "Oh, I see!" and Piglet, who was rather
glad that Tiggers didn't like haycorns, said, "What about thistles?"

"Thistles," said Tigger, "is what Tiggers like best."

So they went to see Eeyore.

"Hallo, Eeyore!" said Pooh. "This is Tigger." "What is?" said Eeyore.

"This," explained Pooh and Piglet together, and Tigger smiled his happiest
smile and said nothing.

Eeyore walked all round Tigger one way, and then turned and walked all
round him the other way.

"What did you say it was?" he asked. "Tigger. "

"Ah!" said Eeyore.

"He's just come," explained Piglet. "Ah!" said Eeyore again.

He thought for a long time and then said: "When is he going?"

Almost immediately, as it turned out.

"What's the matter?" asked Pooh. "Hot!" mumbled Tigger....

"But you said," began Pooh-"you said that Tiggers liked everything except
honey and haycorns."

"And thistles," said Tigger, who was now running round in circles with his
tongue hanging out.

So they went to see Kanga. And when they had explained the situation to
her, she kindly told Tigger to look in her cupboard to see what he'd like.

But the more Tigger put his nose into this and his paw into that, the more
things he found which Tiggers didn't like. And when he had found
everything in the cupboard, and couldn't eat any of it, he said to Kanga,
"What happens now?"

But Kanga and Christopher Robin and Piglet were all standing round Roo,
watching him have his Extract of Malt. And Roo was saying, "Must I?" and
Kanga was saying, "Now, Roo dear, you remember what you promised."

"What is it?" whispered Tigger to Piglet.

"His Strengthening Medicine," said Piglet. "He hates it."

So Tigger came closer, and he leant over the back of Roo's chair, and
suddenly he put out his tongue, and took one large golollop, and, with a
sudden jump of surprise, Kanga said, "Oh!" and then clutched at the spoon
again just as it was disappearing, and pulled it safely back out of
Tigger's mouth. But the Extract of Malt had gone.

"Tigger dear!" said Kanga.

"He's taken my medicine, he's taken my medicine, he's taken my medicine!"
sang Roo happily, thinking it was a tremendous joke.

Then Tigger looked up at the ceiling, and closed his eyes, and his tongue
went round and round his chops, in case he had left any outside, and a
peaceful smile came over his face as he said, "So that's what Tiggers
like!"

And so

***CRASH!!!!!!!***

"Tigger, help the man up. That's Piglet's bodyguard you just knocked over.
I mean, his former bodyguard."

"He's gone to sleep," said Tigger.

"No, I think he's unconscious. That was a little rough, wasn't it?"

"I was in a hurry," explained Tigger. "He got in the way. "

"He must have come back for something. That's strange. I thought he'd
gotten just about everything he could. Well, he won't get away this time.
"

"You're sorry about hitting his head with the floor, aren't you, Tigger?
That's good."

Excuse me while I call the police

.

THINGS AS THEY
MIGHT BE

By and by Piglet woke up. As soon as he woke he said to himself, "Oh!"
Then he said bravely, "Yes," and then, still more bravely, "Quite so." But
he didn't feel very brave, for the word which was really jiggeting about
in his brain was "Heffalumps."

What was a Heffalump like? Was it Fierce?

Did it come when you whistled? And how did it come?

Was it Fond of Pigs at all?

If it was Fond of Pigs, did it make any difference what sort of Pig?

Supposing it was Fierce with Pigs, would it make any difference if the Pig
had a grandfather called

TRESPASSERS WILLIAM?

In this chapter, we come from the illusions of Eeyore and Tigger to those
of Piglet, and to illusions in general. To the Taoist, unhappiness  is the
result of  being  guided  by illusions-such as the  mistaken belief that
man is something separate  from the natural world. Problems, be they
economical,  ecological, or whatever,. Are caused by a failure to see
What's There. Unpleasant feelings come from illusions: fear from What
Might Be (which hasn't happened yet), sadness from What Might Have Been
(which is not necessarily what would have been), and so on. Piglets,
living in fear of What's Coming Next, What Can Go Wrong, What If I Do
Something Foolish, and such, cannot enjoy and make the most of the present
moment. Later, they look back and. realize that they didn't  live it. And
that realization makes them feel more  inadequate than they already did.
However, because  of their sensitivities, their strong
experiencefiling-and-recalling memories, and their cautious,
one-step-at-a-time natures, Piglets-far -more-than Eeyores and Tiggers,
Rabbits and Owls-have-the-ability . to rife- to a .challenge and
accomplish the most difficult tasks, once interfering illusions have been
cleared away.

We will begin our examination of illusions with three narratives
concerning the Perception of

Situations, which show that It All Depends on How One Looks at Things. The
first is by the Tao

ist writer Lieh-tse:

A man noticed that his axe was missing. Then he saw the neighbor's son
pass by. The boy looked like a thief, walked like a thief, behaved like a
thief. Later that day, the man found his axe where he had left it the day
before. The next time he saw the neighbor's son, the boy looked, walked,
and behaved like an honest, ordinary boy.

The second example is the Chinese story of "The Well by the Road"

A man dug a well by the side of a road. For years afterward, grateful
travelers talked of the Wonderful Well. But one night, a man fell into it
and drowned. After that, people avoided the Dreadful Well. Later it was
discovered that the victim was a drunken thief who had left the road to
avoid being captured by the night patrol-only to fall into the
justice-Dispensing Well.

Same well; different views.

The third selection is from the writings of Chuang-tse:

An archer competing for a clay vessel shoots effortlessly, his skill and
concentration unimpeded. If the prize is changed to a brass ornament, his
hands begin to shake. If it is changed to gold, he squints as if he were
going blind. His abilities do not deteriorate, but his belief in them
does, as he, allows the supposed value of an external , reward to cloud
his vision.

Unfortunately, even the wise can occasionally go wrong by misinterpreting
what's in front of them. In the third chapter of Winnie-the-Pooh, for
example, a certain Wise but Overstuffed Bear-

"Who's Overstuffed?" said Pooh.

"All right, Pooh, you're not Overstuffed. You're Physically Superfluous."

"Oh, I wouldn't go that far," said Pooh modestly.

Anyway, Winnie-the-Pooh, whom most everyone calls Pooh, for short, was-

"No one calls me Pooh for Short," said Pooh. "Just Pooh. "

Yes. All right ... Winnie-the-Pooh, whom most everyone calls just Pooh,
was walking around and around in the snow near Piglet's house. When Piglet
asked him what he was doing, he said he was Tracking something. He didn't
know what. Possibly just possibly, you know-it was a Woozle. Possibly it
was more than that.

"It's a very funny thing," said Bear, "but there seem to be two animals
now. This-whatever-itwas-has been joined by another-whatever-itis-and the
two of them are now proceeding in company. Would you mind coming with me,
Piglet, in case they turn out to be Hostile Animals?"

And Piglet, who ought to have known better, didn't. We mean, he did. Join
him, that is.

There was a small spinney of larch trees just here, and it seemed as if
the two Woozles, if that is what they were, had been going round this
spinney; so round this spinney went Pooh and Piglet after them; Piglet
passing the time by telling Pooh what his Grandfather Trespassers W had
done to Remove Stiffness after Tracking, and how his Grandfather
Trespassers W had suffered in his later years from Shortness of Breath,
and other matters of interest, and Pooh wondering what a Grandfather was
like, and if perhaps this was Two Grandfathers they were after now, and,
if so, whether he would be allowed to take one home and keep it, and what
Christopher Robin would say. And still the tracks went on in front of
them... .

Suddenly Winnie-the-Pooh stopped, and pointed excitedly in front of him.
"Look!"

"What?" said Piglet, with a jump. And then, to show that he hadn't been
frightened, he jumped up and down once or twice in an exercising sort of
way.

"The tracksl" said Pooh. "A third animal has joined the other two!"

So-things were beginning to look Slightly Dangerous for Pooh and Piglet.
But at least the

third animal wasn't a Woozle. As Pooh pointed out, its prints were
different from the first two sets. They were smaller.

So they went on, feeling just a little anxious now, in case the three
animals in front of them were of Hostile Intent.... And then, all of a
sudden, Winnie-the-Pooh stopped again, and licked the tip of his nose in a
cooling manner, for he was feeling more hot and anxious than ever in his
life before. There were four animals in front of them!

The suspense was becoming unbearable. No, that's not the word we want.
What we mean is . . .

"I think," said Piglet, when he had licked the tip of his nose, too, and
found that it brought very little comfort, "I think that I have just
remembered something. I have just remembered something that I forgot to do
yesterday and shan't be able to do tomorrow. So I suppose I really ought
to go back and do it now."

"We'll do it this afternoon, and I'll come with you," said Pooh.

"It isn't the sort of thing you can do in the afternoon," said Piglet
quickly. "It's a very particular morning thing, that has to be done in the
morning, and, if possible, between the hours of-What would you say the
time was?"

"About twelve," said Winnie-the-Pooh, looking at the sun.

"Between, as I was saying, the hours of twelve and twelve five. So,
really, dear old Pooh, if you'll excuse me-What's that?"

It was Christopher Robin, whistling to them from the branches of a nearby
tree. What a relief.

"Silly old Bear," he said, "what were you doing? First you went round the
spinney twice by yourself, and then Piglet ran after you and you went
round again together, and then you were just going round a fourth time-"

Oh. So that's what it was. How embarrassing.

Speaking of snow, we might also mention the time that Pooh and Piglet were
out on a walk and decided to build a house for Eeyore in a sheltered spot
in the pine wood by Eeyore's Gloomy Place. Of course, they needed
something to build it with. Sticks would work nicely.

"There was a heap of sticks on the other side of the wood," said Piglet.
"I saw them. Lots and lots.

All piled up."

So they took the pile of sticks and made a house for Eeyore. And later,
when Eeyore couldn't find his pile of-that is, when he couldn't find his
house, he and Christopher Robin went looking for

it, and met Pooh and Piglet, and ...

"Where did you say it was?" asked Pooh. "Just here," said Eeyore.

"Made of sticks?" "Yes. "

"Ohl" said Piglet. "What?" said Eeyore.

"I just said `Oh!' " said Piglet nervously. And so as to seem quite at
ease he hummed Tiddely-pom once or twice in a what-shall-we-do-now kind of
way.

"You're sure it was a house?" said Pooh. "I mean, you're sure the house
was just here?"

"Of course I am," said Eeyore. And he murmured to himself, "No brain at
all some of them."

"Why, what's the matter, Pooh?" asked Christopher Robin.

"Well," said Pooh.... "The fact is," said Pooh ... "Well, the fact is,"
said Pooh . . . "You see," said Pooh.... "It's like this," said Pooh, and
something seemed to tell him that he wasn't explaining very well, and he
nudged Piglet again.

"It's like this," said Piglet quickly.... "Only warmer," he added after
deep thought.

"What's warmer?"

"The other side of the wood, where Eeyore's house is."

So they went there, and Eeyore found his house, and ...

So they left him in it; and Christopher Robin went back to lunch with his
friends Pooh and Piglet,

and on the way they told him of the Awful Mistake they had made. And when
he had finished laugh

ing, they all sang the Outdoor Song for Snowy Weather the rest of the way
home....

How embarrassing.

"We're back," said Pooh.

"So you are. I was so busy writing that I didn't realize you'd gone."

"Piglet and I were just going over some Riddles," said Pooh. "Piglet has
one for you."

"Very good, Piglet. What's your Riddle?" "It's this," said Piglet. "What
barks and has feathers?"

"Barks and has feathers? I ... I don't know." "A bird dog."

"Hmm."

"Is something wrong?" asked Piglet.

"All right, Piglet, here's one for you. What's the difference between a
filing cabinet and a kangaroo?"

"I don't know," said Piglet.

"You don't? You don't know the difference between  a filing cabinet and a
kangaroo?"

"No," said Piglet.

"Well, then, I won't let you file any of my papers.

Silence.

"I don't get it," said Pooh.

In addition to the common human tendency to misinterpret What's There-as
demonstrated by sometimes-a-little-too-human Pooh and Piglet in the snow
just now-we might mention the inclination of a good many people to fail to
notice anything but the unusual, as can be illustrated by the Chinese
story of "The Ox and the Rat":

Many years ago Buddha called twelve animals before him, and told them that
he would name a year of the Chinese zodiac after each. The animals were
very pleased. But then the question of order arose, and trouble began.

"I should be first," said the rat, "because of my intelligence. "

"No, I should be first," said the ox. "Because of my size."

The two animals argued for some time about which was more important,
intelligence or size. After a while, the rat fell silent.

"All right," he said at last, "I admit that size is more important."

"Good," said the ox. "It's settled."

"Not so fast," said the rat. "My size is more impressive than yours."

"What?" snorted the indignant ox. "How can you, a mere rodent, impress
anyone with your size?"

"Let us go before the people," replied the rat, "and let the opinion of
the majority decide."

"Ridiculous!" the ox exclaimed. "Why should we waste time on your
nonsense? Anyone can see that-"

"Now, now," said Buddha. "Let's not argue about it any longer. Of course
the rat is smaller than you are. But why not let the majority of the
people decide? Whoever more impresses them with his size shall be declared
the winner."

The ox, certain of victory, agreed.

"Lord Buddha," said the rat. "With the consent of the ox, I wish to have
one favor granted before we present ourselves. If I am truly as small as
the ox insists I am, I should like to lessen my inevitable embarrassment.
Therefore, I ask that you temporarily double my size."

Buddha asked the ox if he had any objections.

"Of course not," the ox answered. "After all, how much difference could it
make? I'd still be one hundred times bigger than he is!"

The ox and the rat, the rat now twice his ordinary size, went out and
walked among the crowds. Everywhere they went, people exclaimed in
amazement.

"Look at the size of that rat!" they shouted. "Look at that enormous rat!"

No  one noticed the ox. Everyone had seen an ox before. There was nothing
unusual about him. And that is how the rat impressed the people with his
size, and became the first animal in the Chinese zodiac.

"By the way, Piglet, I've been thinking about that sign by your house . .
. "

"You mean `TRESPASSERS W'?"

"Yes. That was your grandfather's name, you said. "

"Yes-Trespassers William."

"Well, he must have been a rather large pig, to put up such a tall sign."

"Er ... Well ... He didn't put it up himself. A friend did it for him."

"A friend?"

"Yes, another sort of animal. A tall sort of animal. "

"You mean, like a giraffe?"

"Yes, yes-a giraffe. That was it."

"It must have been an amusing friendship, a pig and a giraffe. I didn't
know giraffes could be found around here."

"They can't," said Piglet. "Ordinarily. But this giraffe was over here on
an Exchange Program."

"Oh? What did we send in exchange?"

"Er ... A box of weasels."

"That doesn't sound like a very fair exchange."

"Well, it was a large box."

Yes, well ... Speaking of Illusions, let's return to that subject. We
believe there are a few things more to be said.

Although Illusions exist all over the world, the Industrial West seems to
have more than a fair share of them. And the Illusions of the Westwhich of
course by now have been exported to the East-deserve to be watched out for
with special care. It seems rather ironic, somehow, that "realistic,"
"scientific" Western industrial society sneers at the relatively harmless
myths and acquired beliefs of the native peoples of the world-a good many
of which have at least some basis in factwhile perpetuating irrational
beliefs and practices so dangerous that they are destroying the earth. And
probably the most destructive of all the Illusions of the West is the
superstitious notion that Technology will solve all our difficulties.

This Technology Worship could be said to have started in Western Europe in
the 1500s or so, with Explorations and Expansions that led to the growth
of Commercialism, which led to the Industrial Revolution of the 1700s. The
rapid proliferation of Hungry Machines, and the accompanying breakneck
exploitation of natural resources with which to feed them, quickly
transformed rural, agricultural societies-"Good morning, Mrs. Witherspoonl
What a lovely cow!"-into city and factory societies ("I certainly
hope-gasp, wheeze-we don't run out of--sough-coal before the day is
over!") and then into big city, big industry societies: "That's right,
Inspector-they stole everything that wasn't fastened to the floor!" In the
Victorian era, this Industrial Fanaticism was given a large boost by
empire-and-opinion makers who believed that science could do anything, and
that any opinions to the contrary were heresy.

But well before then, some similar
pillagethe-earth-and-let's-have-no-nonsense-about-it nonsense had been
exported from Europe to the New World. And with it came the absurd and
groundless  belief that money could buy happiness. It would have been
rather surprising if such a belief had not arrived on these shores,
considering that a good many of the earliest immigrants were debtors from
English prisons, fur trappers, tobacco and cotton barons-to-be, and
Puritan tradesmen. Such people tended to know enough about the natural
world to exploit it, but not much more-if indeed they knew even that. The
Puritans in particular knew next to nothing about how to get along in the
North American forests, meadows, and mountains, and next to nothing about
how to get along with the people who  did. As the old saying puts it,
"They fell first upon their knees, and then upon the Indians." And then
upon the landscape. As Luther Standing Bear, chief of the Oglala Sioux,
described the situation:

We did not think of the great open plains, the beautiful rolling hills,
and winding streams with tangled growth, as "wild." Only to the white man
was nature a "wilderness" and only to him was the land "infested" with
"wild" animals and "savage" people. To us it was tame. Earth was bountiful
and we were surrounded with the blessings of the Great Mystery. Not until
the hairy man from the east came and with brutal frenzy heaped injustices
upon us and the families we loved was it "wild" for us. When the very
animals of the forest began fleeing from his approach, then it was that
for us the "Wild West" began.

Today, thanks to this rather lopsided cultural foundation, we live in what
is commonly described as a Materialistic Society. But that description is
in error. Ours is in reality an Abstract Value society-one in which things
are not appreciated for what they are so much as for what they represent.
If Western industrial society appreciated the Material World, there would
be no junkyards, no clearcut forests, no shoddily designed and
manufactured products, no poisoned water sources, no obese, fuel-guzzling
automobiles, nor any of the other horrors and eyesores that haunt us at
every turn. If ours were a materialistic society, we would love the
physical world-and we would know our limits within it.

In truth, Western industrial society does not even notice the Material
World. It quickly discards it, leaves it to rust in the rain. The material
world is Here and Now, and industrial society does not appreciate or pay
attention to the Here and Now. It's too busy coveting and rushing after
the There and Later On. As a result, it all too often fails to see what is
right in front of it, and what's coming from that. It forgets where it has
been; it does not know where it is going.

"Going on an Expotition?" said Pooh eagerly. "I don't think I've ever been
on one of those. Where are we going to on this Expotition?"

"Expedition, silly old Bear. It's got an `x' in it."

"Oh!" said Pooh. "I know." But he didn't really.

"We're going to discover the North Pole."

"Oh!" said Pooh again. "What is the North Pole?" he asked.

"It's just a thing you discover," said Christopher Robin carelessly, not
being quite sure himself.

Perhaps the preceding glimpse at our historical conditioning can help to
explain why Western industrial society has such a poor record when it
comes to observing What's There. In our part of the world, this
unobservant tendency is displayed in the most depressing manner whenever
there's an Election. For nearly thirty years now, the nation that was once
the Light of the Free World has been electing to the highest office  in
the land a succession of Nightmare Clowns who lead us deeper and deeper
into darkness as they encourage massive greed and corruption, run up
multibilliondollar debts for future generations to pay, turn the economy
into jelly, refuse to take action necessary to save what's left of the
natural world ("More studies are needed"), and threaten to blow up the
planet because some country somewhere isn't doing what they think it ought
to quickly enoughall the while making remarks on the intelligence level of
"If you've seen one redwood tree, you've seen them all."

And speaking of trees, if the majority of voters are not living in some
sort of fantasy, why this increasing tendency to talk about Protecting the
Environment while voting more than ever against it? In a recent election
in our once-almost-environmentalist home state, for example, the majority
voted to allow one of the nation's most notoriously unsafe and unnecessary
nuclear power plants to continue operation despite its persistent
violation of vital safety regulations; rejected a measure that would have
restricted throwaway packaging; and turned down an honest, self-funded,
pro-environment political candidate to re-elect a politician who for years
has actively opposed the preservation of what little remains of the
state's uncut forests, who supports the timber industry's policy of
clearcutting public lands and sending the logs overseas for processing,
and who has annually appended to appropriations bills riders forbidding
citizens from challenging old-growth timber sales in court. So much for
Planet Earth.

The natural world is all right, voters across the country seem to be
saying, as long as its preservation doesn't interfere with the process of
destroying it to earn money. Let Someone Else pay for its protection. But,
considering that less than 1 percent of American philanthropic giving goes
to conservation, it would appear that Someone Else is just another
fantasy.

"We're all going on an Expotition with Christopher Robin!"

"What is it when we're on it?"

"A sort of boat, I think," said Pooh.

"Oh! That sort."

"Yes. And we're going to discover a Pole or something. Or was it a Mole?
Anyhow we're going to discover it."

Unfortunately for our chances of survival and happiness, we in the West
have inherited an Eeyore version of religion, which denounces the world as
an evil place whose ways are to be ignored by the wise, and an Eeyore sort
of science, which sneers at anything beyond a mechanistic view of the
earth-the secrets of which it attempts to sneak out of it bit by bit, for
the purpose of manipulating the natural world. Is either of these Ways
very likely to get us out of the mess we're in? Or to even help us see
what's causing it?

Eeyore religion says that the earth isn't worth saving, anyway, and that
when it comes to an end, the Faithful will be transported instantly to
heaven. No problem. We'd like to see them explain things to Saint Peter at
the Gate, when he asks them what they did with the world that God
entrusted to them. That might get a bit sticky.

Eeyore science, on the other hand, insists that Technology will rescue us
from destruction-including the considerable destruction that Technology
causes. When it tells us things like that, we can't help but wonder if it
isn't trying to be some sort of religion itself. No, not a religion,
exactlysome sort of voodoo.

"Wunga wunga, moomba noonga-Great Tin God, save us from hexachlorobenzene,
ethylene dibromide, toxaphene, chlordane, parathion, and everything else
you've given us that's gone wrong." Well, wunga wunga,  everybody-and lots
of luck!

"Oh! Piglet," said Pooh excitedly, "we're going on an Expotition, all of
us, with things to eat. To discover something."

"To discover what?" said Piglet anxiously.

"Oh! just something."

"Nothing fierce?"

"Christopher Robin didn't say anything about fierce. He just said it had
an `x'."

"It isn't their necks I mind," said Piglet earnestly. "It's their
teeth...."

The fearful fantasies we have inherited have conditioned us to believe
that we need to be protected from the natural world. Better Living Through
Heavy Industry, and so on. In reality, as anyone ought to be able to see
by now, the natural world needs to be protected from us. Its wisdom needs
to be recognized, respected, and understood by us, and not merely viewed
through the distorted lenses of our illusions about it. As Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle cautioned, through his character Sherlock Holmes, "One's ideas
must be as broad as Nature if they are to interpret Nature," and "When one
tries to rise above Nature one is liable to fall below it." Chuang-tse's
words to that effect have a timely ring:

When leaders pursue knowledge but do not follow the Way, all who follow
them become lost in confusion. How can I say this is so? Much knowledge is
applied in the making of bows, crossbows, arrows, and slingshots, but the
birds in the air are disturbed and injured by it. Much knowledge is used
in making hooks, nets, and other such devices, but the fish in the waters
are disturbed and injured by it. Much knowledge is utilized in the design
and placement of traps, meshes, and snares, but the creatures of the
ground are disturbed and injured by it.

As knowledge becomes increasingly clever, versatile, and artful, the
people all around are disturbed and injured by it. They then struggle to
grasp what they do not know, but make no attempt to grasp what they know
already. They condemn the misunderstanding of others, but do not condemn
their own. From this more confusion comes.

If the sun and moon lost their light, the mountains and rivers abandoned
their vitality, and the four seasons came to an end, no insect or plant
would retain its true nature. Yet this is the condition produced in men by
an obsession for knowledge. Honesty and simplicity are overlooked, and
restlessness is admired. Quiet, effortless action is forgotten, and loud
quarreling is heard. Such is the nature of hunger for knowledge. Its noise
throws the world into chaos

We might add some other words by Chuang tse:

Men honor what lies within the sphere of their knowledge, but do not
realize how dependent they are on what lies beyond it.

To illustrate the vital truth of that last statement, we have decided to
give a very brief history of what we call Popular Radiation.

In the 1930s, as people were dying from the effects of radium-laced Health
Tonics, the U.S. government established its first maximum level of
tolerable exposure to radiation. Just in case, you know.

In the 1940s, following study of Hiroshima bombing victims, that level was
halved. Just to be safe, you understand.

In the 1950s, in response to concern over nuclear-bomb-testing fallout,
which seemed to be affecting some people in unpleasant ways, the maximum
tolerable level was substantially lowered. Just as a precaution.

At the same time, however, utility company advertisements were extolling
the charms of the newest form of power generation-"clean, safe" nuclear
energy. Their billboards invited customers to "Take the Family to the
Nuclear Power Park." X-ray machines were being used in shoe stores to
examine children's feet. And people were having their
supposedly-enlarged-but-actually-normal thymus glands irradiated. Like
many exposed to radiation before them, a sizable number of these people
developed cancer and died.

In the 1960s, more and more people came to suspect that they weren't being
told the Whole Truth about this sort of thing. And then ...

In the 1970s, researchers reported that Americans were being exposed to
nine times more radiation from medical applications than from atmospheric
nuclear fallout-which by then, due in part to studies of certain Nevada
residents and military personnel, was being connected with all sorts of
problems. In 1979, the Three Mile Island nuclear power facility broke down
and irradiated the surrounding area.

In the 1980s, new data on the Hiroshima victims and their descendants
showed that the risk of cancer from radiation was up to fifteen times
greater than authorities had previously believed. Emissions from nuclear
plants were linked with thyroid damage, miscarriages, and other health
problems. And before the end of the decade, the Chernobyl nuclear
facility, like Three Mile Island before it, had done what experts in the
field had said it wouldn't do in a thousand years. Reports of
near-disasters at other plants were being leaked to the press . . . So the
"safe exposure" level was lowered again. Not taking any chances.

At each step of the way, authorities assured the public that the New
Devices and New Amounts of radiation were safe. And each time, they were
wrong.

Today the public is being captivated by computers, word processors, and
the like-whose cathode ray tubes emit X-ray radiation, and whose circuits
and display terminals produce strong electromagnetic fields. They're
perfectly safe, authorities assure us. And if any difficulties should
happen to develop, we will certainly be notified later on.

The latest Popular Radiation device is the Microwave Oven, which bombards
food with highfrequency electromagnetic radiation, irritating it until it
heats up. This sort of Perversion of Nature is perfectly safe, authorities
insist-if it weren't, the Wonderful Machines wouldn't be on the market.
Maybe the authorities are correct this time, just for once. On the other
hand, maybe they're not.

As soon as he had finished his lunch Christopher Robin whispered to
Rabbit, and Rabbit said, "Yes, yes, of course," and they walked a little
way up the stream together.

"I didn't want the others to hear," said Christopher Robin.

"Quite so," said Rabbit, looking important.

"It's-I wondered-It's only-Rabbit, I suppose you don't know, What does the
North Pole look like."

"Well," said Rabbit, stroking his whiskers. "Now you're asking me."

"I did know once, only I've sort of forgotten," said Christopher Robin
carelessly.

"It's a funny thing," said Rabbit, "but I've sort of forgotten too,
although I did know once."

"I suppose it's just a pole stuck in the ground?"

"Sure to be a pole," said Rabbit, "because of calling it a pole, and if
it's a pole, well, I should think it would be sticking in the ground,
shouldn't you, because there'd be nowhere else to stick it."

"Yes, that's what I thought."

"The only thing," said Rabbit, "is where is it sticking?"

"That's what we're looking for," said Christopher Robin.

"Say, Piglet-what's that at the window?"

"It's the Heffalump!" cried Piglet, jumping straight up in alarm.

"Oh-it's the garbageman, taking away the recycling. You didn't really
think it was a Heffalump, did you?"

"No (pant, pant). Not (pant) really."

"Now, Piglet. What if it had been a Heffalump? What could he have done to
you?"

"I don't know," squeaked Piglet. "But he might have thought of something."

"You don't even know what a Heffalump is, do you?"

"No ... Not exactly."

"You don't even know if Heffalumps exist."

"Well, do they?"

"Not in this part of the world, anyway-not lurking about outside the
window."

"Are you sure?"

"Absolutely. You won't find a Heffalump around here any more than you'll
find a giraffe putting up a sign by your house."

"Oh," said Piglet. "I see."

Where were we? Oh, yes-dangerous illusions. In his amazingly Taoist-like
Magical Child, Joseph Chilton Pearce described our society's predicament
this way:

How do we believe that we can predict and control the natural forces of
the universe? Through clever intellectual manipulations and tool usage. We
accept this notion so completely because we have been conditioned to
believe implicitly that only by so using our intelligence can we, in fact,
survive nature. Interaction between the mindbrain and its source of
information [the earth] has been rigorously, religiously denied by Western
logic, if not most cultural logic. Interaction with the living earth would
imply that the earth responded in kind, interacting with us. And the one
cardinal rule of all classical Western academic belief ... is that the
mind has absolutely no relation to the world other than to be informed of
that world through the senses and to make some sort of intelligent
reaction to that information. This belief has automatically robbed us of
personal power. Having no personal power to draw on, we are reduced to
only one source of power: tool usage. And so, we have evolved a continuing
body of knowledge concerning the employment, creation, enhancement, and
service of tools. Our real criterion of value becomes the culture's body
of knowledge offering or promising enhanced tool production, possible
domination of nature, and so some security. Potential is seen as an
increase of tools. [our emphasis] The training and education of children
is designed to lead to better tool invention, production, consumption, and
handling.

Our body of knowledge and tool development has never given, is not
presently giving, and almost surely will never give us either physical
security or well-being. The more vast and awesome our tool production has
become, the greater our anxiety, hostility, fear, resentment, and
aggression. But the direct correlation between our anxiety and tool
production is almost beyond our grasp because our intelligence is itself
the result of our conditioning by and within that very body of knowledge.
Our intelligence is trained to believe that any imperfections in the
reality resulting from our activities, such as personal anguish, misery,
and fear, simply indicate the need for improvements in the body of
knowledge and/or improvements in tool production, distribution, and
application. Even as our body of knowledge splits us off from our lives
and creates anxiety and unhappiness, it conditions us to believe
religiously that escape from our misery lies in perfecting that body of
knowledge.

In other words, modern man's difficulties, dangerous beliefs, and feelings
of loneliness, spiritual emptiness, and personal weakness are caused by
his illusions about, and separation from, the natural world. Well, the
Taoists told us this sort of mess would happen. And they told us what we
could do about it. Now it's time to see what that is.

THINGS AS THEY ARE

On the 10th of September last, I walked down the Via Salaria and into the
Republic of Utopia, a quiet country lying eighty years east of Fara
Sabina. Noticing the cheerful disposition of the inhabitants, I enquired
the cause of their contentment, and I was told that it was due to their
laws and to the teaching they received from their earliest school days. .
. .

In order to teach small children to observe particulars they practise a
kind of game, in which a number of small objects, e.g., three grains of
barley, a small coin, a blue button . . . are concealed in the hand. The
hand is opened for an instant, then quickly closed again, and the child is
asked to say what it has seen. For older children the game is gradually
made more elaborate, until finally they all know how their hats and shoes
are made. I was also informed that by learning how to define words these
people have succeeded in defining their economic terms, with the result
that various iniquities of the stock market and financial world have
entirely disappeared from their country, for no one allows himself to be
fooled any longer.

These very Taoist words are from Gold and Work, by Ezra Pound. But the
principle they describe-that of Reality Appreciation-is a great deal
older. Before we present some official Taoist writings on that sort of
thing, we would like to quote from our favorite unofficial Taoist Writer,
Henry David Thoreau:

Shams and delusions are esteemed for soundest truths, while reality is
fabulous. If men would steadily observe realities only, and not allow
themselves to be deluded, life, to compare it with such things as we know,
would be like a fairy tale and the Arabian Nights' Entertainments.... By
closing the eyes and slumbering, and consenting to be deceived by shows,
men establish and confirm their daily life of routine and habit
everywhere, which still is built on purely illusory foundations. Children,
who play life, discern its true law and relations more clearly than men,
who fail to live[-]it _worthily, but who think that they are wiser by
experience, that is, by failure. . . . Men esteem truth remote, in the
outskirts of the system; ^-behind the farthest star, before Adam and after
the last man. In eternity there is indeed something true and sublime. But
all these times and places and occasions are now and here. God himself
culminates in the present moment, and will never be more divine in the
lapse of all the ages. And we are enabled to apprehend at all what is
sublime and noble only by the perpetual instilling and drenching of the
reality that surrounds us.

Out of the "Hundred Schools" of Chinese philosophy, only two-Confucianism
and Taoismhave survived. They have lasted through thousands of years
because they have proven the most Useful. The Chinese are very practical
people-they have no respect for things that sound good but don't work. In
the East generally, and in China especially, philosophy has always been
considered of no value unless it can be, and is, applied in one's daily
life.

Western philosophy, having little connection with everyday living, is (to
this observer, at least) comparatively egocentric and impractical, with
much Arguing and Theorizing, and much bounding back and forth across the
intellectual landscapea pleasant, part-time diversion formulated by and
aimed at the likes of Owl, Rabbit, and sometimes Eeyore, but not
particularly supportive of the likes of Piglet and Pooh. Western
philosophy has become the domain of pipe-smoking, tweed-suited college
professors (who may profess it but not necessarily practice it) and
hypercerebral students who, for all their intelligence, often seem to have
a hard time washing their clothes or repairing the lawn mower.

Looking askance at all this, the typical Mind of the West says: So who
needs Eastern philosophy? To such a mind, Eastern philosophy has two
things wrong with it. First, it's Eastern-exotic and mystical, quaint but
useless. Second, it's Philosophy. And what good does that do anybody?

What this narrow-minded attitude overlooks is the fact that much of what
makes up the Practical West came from the East, and most of that came from
China. And, we might add, a good deal of it came from the Taoists-China's
foremost scientists, inventors, medical men, artists, and observers of the
natural world.

In the West we are told in school that Johann Gutenberg invented movable
type, William Harvey discovered the circulation of the blood, and Sir
Isaac Newton was the originator of his First Law of Motion. In reality,
these things were invented and discovered in China long before those men
were born. In addition to who-knows-howmany other things, the Chinese have
given the world the mechanical clock, paper (including wallpaper, toilet
paper, paper handkerchiefs, money, and playing cards), multicolor
printing, porcelain, lacquer, phosphorescent paint, the magic lantern
(ancestor of the movie projector), the spinning wheel, the wheelbarrow,
the umbrella, the modern plow, harness, seed drill, and rotary winnowing
fan (as well as the practice of growing crops in rows), the fishing reel,
the modern compass (and the difference between true and magnetic north),
the seismograph, relief and grid maps, the decimal system, the calculator,
the hermetically sealed research laboratory, the chain drive, the belt
drive, the chain pump, the essentials of the steam engine, dial and
pointer devices, cast iron, the manufacture of steel from cast iron, the
suspension bridge, the segmental arch (non-semi-circle) bridge, the
contour transport canal, the canal pound-lock, masts, sails, the rudder,
watertight compartments in ships, the paddle-wheel boat, land sailing, the
kite (including the acrobatic kite, the fighter kite, the message kite,
the musical kite, the lighted kite ... ), the hang glider (which, like the
acrobatic kite, was developed and flown by Taoist adepts in the mountains
of China as a way to learn and work with natural laws), the hot-air
balloon, the helicopter rotor, the parachute (fifteen hundred years before
Leonardo da Vinci's), tuned bells, "church" (court and temple) bells,
equal temperament in music (championed one hundred and thirty-eight years
later in the West by Johann Sebastian Bach), drilling for natural gas, the
butane gas cylinder (in its original form, a gas-filled bamboo tube with a
valve at one end, over which travelers cooked their food on journeys),
sunglasses, waterproof clothing, mountain-climbing gear, and gunpowder
(which, ironically, was discovered by a Taoist searching for the formula
to an elixir of longevity). A group of court ladies invented matches,
which were brought to Europe one thousand years later. Some other Chinese
discovered the structure of snowflakes-two thousand years ahead of the
West-and the existence of sunspots and solar wind. The Chinese discovered
diabetes and deficiency diseases and pioneered the sciences of
endocrinology, immunology, thyroid hormone therapy, and anatomy (deducing,
among other things, the presence and design of the eardrum before its
physical discovery). They developed systems of biological pest control . .
. Well, that ought to be enough to make the point. These people Noticed
things.

Unfortunately, one thing the West did not import from the East was the
traditional Chinese belief that science, morality, and spirituality must
go together; that science without ethical and spiritual considerations was
not a whole science, but a form of madness. Oh, well-we can't have
everything, we suppose.

Returning to Pooh and friends, this business of scientific observation and
so on reminds us of the quite Taoist discovery of the principle of
Poohsticks, a game that has been played around the world ever since it was
described in The House at Pooh Corner (and just possibly before). Pooh, as
you may remember, had been studying fir-cones and had made up a rhyme
about one in particular ...

He had just come to the bridge; and not looking where he was going, he
tripped over something, and the fir-cone jerked out of his paw into the
river.

"Bother," said Pooh, as it floated slowly under the bridge, and he went
back to get another fir-cone which had a rhyme to it. But then he thought
that he would just look at the river instead, because it was a peaceful
sort of day, so he lay down and looked at it, and it slipped slowly away
beneath him ... and suddenly, there was his fir-cone slipping away too.

"That's funny," said Pooh. "I dropped it on the other side," said Pooh,
"and it came out on this side! I wonder if it would do it again?" And he
went back for some more fir-cones.

It did. It kept on doing it. Then he dropped two in at once, and leant
over the bridge to see which of them would come out first; and one of them
did; but as they were both the same size, he didn't know if it was the one
which he wanted to win, or the other one. So the next time he dropped one
big one and one little one, and the big one came out first, which was what
he had said it would do, and the little one came out last, which was what
he had said it would do, so he had won twice ... and when he went home for
tea, he had won thirty-six and lost twenty-eight, which meant that he
was-that he had-well, you take twentyeight from thirty-six, and that's
what he was. Instead of the other way around.

And that was the beginning of the game called Poohsticks, which Pooh
invented, and which he and his friends used to play on the edge of the
Forest. But they played with sticks instead of fircones, because they were
easier to mark.

In that Poohishly humble incident, one can see all the elements of pure
science as practiced by the Taoists: the chance occurrence, the observant
and inquisitive mind, deduction of the principles involved, application of
those principles, modification of materials, and a new practice or way of
doing things. Not bad. But after all, Pooh is That sort of Bear.

As we have already implied, there is a good deal more to the Importance of
Observation than scientific discoveries. There is also the matter of
Living Wisely and Well. In this area in particular, we believe, the West
could learn a few things from the East. For example, what sort of
education in Practical Wisdom do we tend to receive in school?

There are three hundred cows in a field. The gate has been left open, and
two cows pass through it every minute. How many cows are left in the field
after an hour and a half?

This sort of thing, we're told, will help us once we graduate-help us
apply our learning to everyday matters and, ideally, help us discern the
true from the false. But, to return to the terms of the three-hundred-cow
math problem: If you have ever herded cattle, you know that cows do not
pass through an open gate at the rate of two per minute. They either go
through all at once, or not at all. Or they wander through whenever they
feel up to it. In all probability, there would be no cows left in the
field ten minutes after a gate was opened, or a fence pulled down. But if
you told the teacher that, you would be told that you were wrong. Such is
the difference between School and Life. (And if you in school don't
believe that such a difference exists, just wait until you get out.)

If we were asked to condense Taoist teachings regarding everyday life to
their irreducible essentials, we would say: Observe, Deduce, and Apply.
Watch what is around you-putting aside, as best you can, previous
conceptions that you or others might have about it. Ideally, look at it as
though you were seeing it for the first time. Mentally reduce it to its
basic elements-"See simplicity in complexity," as Lao-tse put it. Use
intuition as well as logic in order to understand what you see (a vital
difference between the Whole Reasoner and the Left-Brain Technician). Look
for connections between one thing and another-notice patterns and
relationships. Study the natural laws you see operating through them. Then
work with those laws, applying the smallest possible amount of
interference and effort, in order to learn more and achieve whatever you
need to-and no more.

Once you make a habit of Observing, Deducing, and Applying, you may sense
a pathway opening up ahead of you-or inside of you, or bothleading to a
deeper understanding of things. You may even feel at times as though
you're in some sort of Other Dimension, like Thoreau's example of the
Arabian Nights' Entertainments. But you're not, really; you're just seeing
and experiencing Things As They Are, rather than as someone-or-other says
they are. And the difference between' the two can be considerable.

In a sense, though, the image of another dimension is an appropriate one.
For as you follow the Way, you leave the land of Either/Or and enter the
land of Both. As Lao-tse wrote in the first chapter of the Tao Te Ching,
many people are unable to follow the Way because they are unable to see
it, being stuck in Either/Or:

Those habitually without desires

Perceive [the Way] as "subtlety."

Those habitually with desires

Perceive it as "action."

These two have the same source,

But different names.

Together they're called "darkness"

Darkness of increasing darkness,

All mystery's gateway.

In other words, Tao is both "subtlety" and "action." Those who consider it
only as spirit and ignore its forms, or who notice its forms but disregard
what is behind and within them, know of only half of it, at best-neither
the Spiritual people who deny the world nor the Physical people who deny
the spirit can know of and follow the Way. But you can.

"I feel dizzy," said Piglet, who had been reading over my shoulder.

"Yes, I did get a bit carried away, didn't I?" "Isn't there some other way
of explaining all that?"

"I suppose. Let's try it like this . . ."

Taoism is not the reject-the-physical-world way of living that some
scholars (and a few Taoists) would have others believe. Even Lao-tse, the
most reclusive of Taoist writers, wrote, "Honor all under heaven as your
body." To a Taoist, a reject-thephysical-world approach would be an
extremist absurdity, impossible to live-without dying. Instead, a Taoist
might say: Carefully observe the natural laws in operation in the world
around you, and live by them. From following them, you will learn the
morality of modesty, moderation, compassion, and consideration (not just
one society's rules and regulations), the wisdom of seeing things as they
are (not of merely collecting "facts" about them), and the happiness of
being in harmony with the Way (which has nothing to do with self-righteous
"spiritual" obsessions and fanaticism). And you will live lightly,
spontaneously, and effortlessly.

"Well, Piglet?"

"Could you tell some stories?"

"Yes, I suppose I could."

"Stories?" said Pooh, opening his eyes.

"I would like to hear some stories," said Piglet.

"So would I," said Pooh. "All seriousness aside."

"All ... Yes. All seriousness aside. Let's see-we were just mentioning
observation, spontaneity, and effortlessness . . . Would you like to hear
`The Old Master and the Horse'?"

"We won't know," said Pooh, "until we've heard it. "

"True enough. This is how it goes..."

A horse was tied outside a shop in a narrow Chinese village street.
Whenever anyone would try

to walk by, the horse would kick him. Before long, a small crowd of
villagers had gathered near the

shop, arguing about how best to get past the dangerous horse. Suddenly,
someone came running. "The Old Master is coming!" he shouted. "He'll know
what to do!"

The crowd watched eagerly as the Old Master came around the corner, saw
the horse, turned, and walked down another street.

"You see," I said, "the Old Master lived the principle of Wu  Wei, or
Effortless Action. That's something the Taoists say we can learn by
watching water.

"Water?" asked Piglet.

"When a stream comes to some stones in its path, it doesn't struggle to
remove them, or fight against them, or think about them. It just goes
around them. And as it does, it sings. Water responds to What's There with
effortless action."

"I think I missed something," said Pooh.

"Missed something where?" I asked.

"In the story-"

"Oh, that. The Old Master knew he didn't have to go down that street. He
knew he could go another way."

"But why didn't the others know?"

"Ah! Precisely. Why didn't they know?"

"I wouldn't have gone down that street," squeaked Piglet. "Not with a
horse in the way. Or a goat. Or a dog. Or anything."

"But why didn't the others-"

"My dear Pooh," said Owl, flying over to the writing table. "In problems
of this sort, one must consider the Physical Properties involved."

"I didn't know there were any," replied Pooh, rubbing his ear.

"That is to say," continued Owl, somewhat annoyed, "the street in question
was narrow, the horse was large-and furthermore it was Belligerent."

"Further along it was what?"

"It kicked. The Old Master knew that it was Futile to Proceed-

"We know that, Owl," I said. "The point is-"

Oh, well-so much for stories. Let's go on to the next principle.

When you observe the natural world, you'll eventually see that everything
in it is designed to succeed-including what some might judge to be "bad."
If you want to learn the natural world's principles of success, you'll
need to see things not as "good" or "bad," but as they are. This does not
mean discard morality, or common sense, or anything of the sort; it simply
means-well, let's show what it means by a couple of examples.

Many centuries ago, the Chinese empress Si Ling-chi overheard complaints
that "worms," or moth larvae, were devouring the leaves of the royal
mulberry tree. So she went out to see what was happening. She watched the
larvae as they spun their cocoons of strong, shimmering threads. Observing
their movements as they spun, she conceived of a way to extract the fibers
and weave clothing material from them. Her observations and experiments
led to the cultivation of what was to become the most highly treasured of
all the world's natural fibers-the magical material known as silk.

On returning from a walk about forty years ago, the Swiss engineer George
deMestral found cockleburs clinging to his clothing. Unlike countless
other people who have cursed the prickly seedpods, picked them off, and
discarded them, he asked himself, "Why do they stick?" Examining them
closely, he found that they were covered with tiny hooks, which had become
embedded in the loops of his clothing fabric. He wondered if it would be
possible to develop fasteners based on a hook-and-loop principle, which
would by their nature be more flexible than anything then being used. From
his watching and wondering came Velcro-from "velvet crochet," or "velvet
hook"-fastening systems made from which are now used all over the world,
in applications too numerous to mention.

Despite the tired old claim that Necessity is the Mother of Invention,
it's usually Observation and Imagination that deserve the credit. The
major portion of useful inventions, knowledge, and achievement has been
brought about by curious, childlike, creative observers of the world
around them, whose vision is unclouded by judgments of what is "possible"
or "impossible," "good" or "bad." The telescope, for example, was invented
in principle by some Dutch children playing with defective lenses
discarded from the shop of a spectacles maker. They found that when the
lenses were held one in front of another-which, of course, everyone knew
was not supposed to be done-distant objects appeared closer. News of their
discovery spread to Italy and to the eager attention of a man named
Galileo Galilei ...

When you see beyond "good" and "bad," you are much better able to
recognize and make the most of What's There. For example, when a Bear
overeats a bit and gets stuck in your front door, you can use his legs to
hang the washing on. And then use the back door.

"That's Owl in the next room, isn't it?" I asked. "What's he talking about
now?"

"He wants to apply for a job as a radio an nouncer," said Piglet. "He's
practicing on Rabbit."

"Oh? Let's go in and see what he has to say. This should be interesting."

"Ladies and Gentlemen," Owl was proclaiming. "For a truly Malicious
treat-"

"That's delicious," corrected Rabbit.

"Hello, Owl," I said. "Just what product are you trying to sell, anyway?"

"Professor Padbury's Shredded Oak," Owl  replied.

"Oh. Professor ... I beg your pardon-did you say Oats, or Oak?"

"Oak. "

"I see. In that case, you had it right the first time. Malicious."

"And look here, Owl-do you really want to get involved in this business?
Promoting products that don't necessarily do anybody any good, making wild
claims, and all that?"

"I thought," said Owl, "that with my voice-"

"Yes, your melodious voice. But surely you could do something better with
it. This may be no affair of mine, but if I could show you the true nature
of advertising . . . I know-let me play you a recording I made when I was
an investigative reporter. Ah, here it is. Now, listen to this-I'm
interviewing Rasmussen Slick, chairman of the American Tobacco Advertising
Council . . ."

"Mr. Slick, many people have pointed out that tobacco advertising today
hardly ever shows anyone smoking a cigarette-nor does it show ashtrays,
smoke, tobacco ash, and other things people would naturally associate with
your product. I'm sure you wouldn't want to show cancer wards and lung
operations ... But aren't those illustrations of clear mountain streams,
snowy hillsides, healthy skiers, and so on just a little evasive and
misleading? What could you say about that?"

"Well, first of all, young man, the American public for many, many years
now has been deluged with statements alleging that tobacco is directly
responsible for health problems of various kinds. I would like to say that
the proof behind such assertions is entirely lacking. What we are
attempting to do is merely provide a reasonable counterbalance to such
ridiculous claims, and show our product in a better, fairer light. I am
proud to say that I have been a cigarette smoker myself for many years
now, and I have never (cough) suffered in any way because of my habit,
which I find pleasant, soothing, and (ahem) relaxing. (Ahem.) Nothing, I
repeat nothing (cough, cough) could be further from the truth (wheeze)
than to (COUGH) claim, as so many now are (HACK, HACK, HACK)say, couldn't
we shut that thing off for a while?"

"Well, Owl?"

"Perhaps," said Owl thoughtfully, "I ought to apply for a teaching
position at the University."

Perhaps. And then again, perhaps not. We're not so sure that Owl would
prove a vital addition to the faculty. For one unfortunate thing about
Owl-now that he has so thoughtfully inserted himself into this chapter to
provide an example of it-is that he has an Image to maintain. And
Maintaining an Image tends to get in the way of seeing What's There. If
one can't clearly see What's There, how can one learn it? And if one can't
learn it, how can one teach it?

You may recall what happened when Rabbit found a notice from Christopher
Robin saying "GON OUT BACKSON BISY BACKSON," and took it to Owl for his
Wise Counsel ...

Owl took Christopher Robin's notice from Rabbit and looked at it
nervously. He could spell his own name WOL, and he could spell Tuesday so
that you knew it wasn't Wednesday, and he could read quite comfortably
when you weren't looking over his shoulder and saying "Well?" all the
time, and he could-

"Well?" said Rabbit.

"Yes," said Owl, looking Wise and Thoughtful. "I see what you mean.
Undoubtedly."

"Well?"

"Exactly," said Owl. "Precisely." And he added, after a little thought,
"If you had not come to me, I should have come to you."

"Why?" asked Rabbit.

"For that very reason," said Owl, hoping that something helpful would
happen soon.

"Yesterday morning," said Rabbit solemnly, "I went to see Christopher
Robin. He was out. Pinned on his door was a notice."

"The same notice?"

"A different one. But the meaning was the same. It's very odd. "

"Amazing," said Owl, looking at the notice again, and getting, just for a
moment, a curious sort of feeling that something had happened to
Christopher Robin's back. "What did you do?"

"Nothing."

"The best thing," said Owl wisely.

"Well?" said Rabbit again, as Owl knew he was going to.

"Exactly," said Owl.

For a little while he couldn't think of anything more; and then, all of a
sudden, he had an idea.

"Tell me, Rabbit," he said, "the exact words of the first notice. This is
very important. Everything depends on this. The exact words of the first
notice. "

"It was just the same as that one really."

Owl looked at him, and wondered whether to push him off the tree; but,
feeling that he could always do it afterwards, he tried once more to find
out what they were talking about.

"The exact words, please," he said, as if Rabbit hadn't spoken.

"It just said, 'Gon out. Backson.' Same as this, only this says 'Bisy
Backson' too."

Owl gave a great sigh of relief.

"Ah!" said Owl. "Now we know where we are."

"Yes, but where's Christopher Robin?" said Rabbit. "That's the point."

Owl looked at the notice again. To one of his education the reading of it
was easy. "Gone out, Backson. Bisy, Backson" just the sort of thing you'd
expect to see on a notice.

"It is quite clear what has happened, my dear Rabbit," he said.
"Christopher Robin has gone out somewhere with Backson. He and Backson are
busy together. Have you seen a Backson anywhere about in the Forest
lately?"

As it turned out, Rabbit wasn't any better than Owl at determining the
meaning of the notice, because he too has an Image to maintain-an image of
Captain-Rabbit-in-charge-of-the-situation, which involves so much rushing
about, so much excitement and what-in-the-world, that it leaves him little
time to sit down and reflect on what something is.

"Hallo, Pooh," said Rabbit.

"Hallo, Rabbit," said Pooh dreamily.

"Did you make that song up?"

"Well, I sort of made it up," said Pooh. "It isn't Brain," he went on
humbly, "because You Know

Why, Rabbit; but it comes to me sometimes."

"Ah!" said Rabbit, who never let things come to him, but always went and
fetched them. "Well,

the point is, have you seen a Spotted or Herbaceous Backson in the Forest,
at all?"

"No," said Pooh. "Not a-no," said Pooh. "I saw Tigger just now."

"That's no good."

"No," said Pooh. "I thought it wasn't." "Have you seen Piglet?"

"Yes," said Pooh. "I suppose that isn't any good either?" he asked meekly.

"Well, it depends if he saw anything." "He saw me," said Pooh.

Rabbit sat down on the ground next to Pooh and, feeling much less
important like that, stood up again.

One of the many advantages of seeing Things As They Are is that we can
solve problems through observation and deduction. After all, how can we
solve problems if we can't first clearly see what they are? And the best
time to see them is in the beginning. Most major difficulties are caused
by a failure to observe the minor difficulties that they start out as.
"Trouble is easily stopped before it commences," wrote Lao-tse. "Put
things in order before chaos occurs." In other words, an ounce of
prevention is worth a pound of pesticide. The overwhelming tendency in
unobservant industrial society, however, is to ignore small problems until
they become enormousand then panic.

"Call out the troops! Mad Tyrant Number Twelve is taking over the world!
We've got to stop him-even if we have to kill half a million people doing
it! Oh, it's simply awful!" Well, let's see ...

Who sold him his weaponry? We did. Who trained his military forces in the
use of it? We did. Who supplied the materials he wanted? We did. Who
supported his vicious dictatorship for years because he persecuted our
"enemies"? We did. And who ignored his unstable personality, his
destruction of anyone who opposed him, and his repeated threats against
world order for all that time? We did. So there you are.

What can be just as hard to see as problemsin-the-making is that a good
many "problems" aren't really problems to begin with. People who don't see
situations for what they are often struggle against difficulties that
aren't there and create difficulties in the process. Or turn small
difficulties into large ones. Compounding any problem (or nonproblem) is
the traditional Western response to difficulties real or imagined: the
tendency to see them emotionally, perceiving them as threats to one's
personal survival-threats that must be fought tooth-and-nail to the bitter
end. In the East, such an approach to life is considered rather immature.
Overdoing it, you know; wasting energy. Or, as the Chinese saying puts it,
"Painting legs on the snake."

So in solving problems, one needs to know if they are problems. Is what
appears at first to be bad truly bad? The following selected Taoist
writings show the importance of that question. The first is our
streamlined version of a story by Liu An, also known as Huai-nan-tse:

An old man and his son lived in an abandoned fortress on the side of a
hill. Their only possession

of value was a horse.

One day, the horse ran away. The neighbors came by to offer sympathy.
"That's really bad!" they said. "How do you know?" asked the old man. The
next day, the horse returned, bringing with it several wild horses. The
old man and his son shut them all inside the gate. The neighbors hurried
over. "That's really good!" they said. "How do you know?" asked the old
man.

The following day, the son tried riding one of the wild horses, fell off,
and broke his leg. The neighbors came around as soon as they heard the
news. "That's really bad!" they said. "How do you know?" asked the old
man. The day after that, the army came through, forcing the local young
men into service to fight a faraway battle against the northern
barbarians. Many of them would never return. But the son couldn't go,
because he'd broken his leg.

The second selection is by Chuang-tse:

Once when Duke Huan was passing by a marsh, a goblin appeared in the road
before him. The duke turned to Kuan Chung, who was driving the carriage.
"Do you see anything in the road ahead of us?" he asked. "I see nothing,"
Kuan Chung replied. By the time the duke returned home, he was speaking
incoherently, and had become ill. For several days, he remained in his
bed.

An officer named Huang Kao-ao called on the duke. "How could a goblin harm
you?" he asked. "You are injuring yourself. If your vital energy is
weakened by fears and anxieties, you will become seriously ill."

"But do goblins exist?" asked the duke.

"Yes, they do. By small mountain lakes, you will find the Li; around
fires, the Ch'ieh; in the dust, the Lei-t'ing. In low-lying areas of the
northeast are the Pei-a and the Wa-lung. In the northwestern lowlands can
be found the I-Yang. The Wang-hsiang live near rivers, the Hsin in the
hills, the K'uei in the mountains, and the Fang-huang in wild places.
Around marshes can be found the Wei-t'o. "

"Describe the Wei-t'o," said the duke.

"A Wei-t'o is as big around as the hub of a carriage wheel, and as tall as
the length of an axle. It wears a purple robe and red cap. It hates the
sound of passing vehicles, and when it hears one, it claps its hands over
its ears. Whoever sees a Wei-t'o is destined to become a great ruler."

"That is what I saw!" exclaimed the duke. He sat up and straightened his
clothes. He began to laugh. By the end of the day, his illness had
vanished.

The third selection also is by Chuang-tse, who uses an event in the
difficult life of K'ung Fu-tse to illustrate a Taoist attitude:

The armies of Ch'en and Ts'ai were locked in battle, and K'ung Fu-tse was
caught between them. For seven days, he had had nothing to eat but coarse
soup. Although much tiredness showed on his face, he spent the time
singing and playing his lute.

Outside the house in which he was staying, two disciples discussed the
situation. "Twice now the Master has been driven from Lu. He had to run
from Wei. In Sung, the very tree beneath which he rested was cut down. In
both Shang and Chou, he was faced with the most extreme difficulties. Now
here he is between Ch'en and Ts'ai. He could easily be killed or taken
prisoner. Yet he plays his lute and sings! What irresponsible behavior!"

Their words were repeated to K'ung Fu-tse, who pushed aside his lute and
remarked, "They speak like small men. Call them in, and I will talk to
them."

The two disciples entered the room. "Master," said one, "we are concerned
about your conduct. It seems very strange, considering that you are
presently in great distress."

"Oh, am I?" K'ung Fu-tse replied. "When a man operates in harmony with the
Way of Heaven, his teachings cannot help but succeed. When he cuts himself
off from the Way of Heaven, his teachings cannot help but fail. Looking
within and examining myself, I see that I am acting in harmony with the
Way of Heaven. I have the principles with which to overcome the terrible
disintegration that I see around me. Yet you say that I am in distress!
There may be difficulty at the moment, but I will not lose the Virtue that
I possess. It is when the ice and snow are on them that we see the
strength of the cypress and the pine. I am grateful for this trouble
around me, because it gives me an opportunity to realize how fortunate I
am." He turned back to his lute, and played again.

The first disciple began to dance. "I did not realize before how high and
deep are the ways of heaven and earth!" the second one exclaimed.

Is "good" necessarily good? Is "bad" necessarily bad? It's considered good
to be beautiful, but many people through being beautiful have ruined their
lives and the lives of others. It's considered bad to be unattractive, but
because of being unattractive, many have come to concern themselves with
matters more important than surface appearance and have gone on to make
something Special of themselves-in quite a few cases becoming Beautiful in
the process. It's considered good to be healthy and strong, but many
energetic people lose their health and strength by taking what they have
for granted, not knowing what it's like to be old and depleted-and
therefore not taking care of themselves-until it's Too Late. It's
considered bad to be ill and weak, but many have responded to such
conditions by examining their lives and changing their ways of doing
things, thereby building up their health and strength to remarkable
degrees. Unattractiveness, illness, and weakness have many valuable
lessons to teach to those willing to learn from them.

It's considered good to live a long life, but many spend their long lives
sitting and complaining, watching television, describing their operations,
and retelling for the umpteenth time what Aunt Gertrude said forty years
ago. Many Great Achievers died young,_ yet lived every minute of the^--
time they had. As Chuang-tse pointed out, even death itself may not
necessarily be bad:

How do we know that to cling to life is not an error? Perhaps our fear of
its end approaching is like forgetting our way and not knowing how to
return home.

Li Chi was a daughter of the border chieftain Ai Feng. When Duke Hsien
claimed her as his wife, she cried until her sleeves were soaked with
tears. But after she had come to know the duke and had shared his palace,
she laughed at her former fears and sadness. How do we know that the
spirits of the dead do not do the same?

Those who dream of feasting may awaken to hunger and sorrow. Those who
dream of hunger may, when they awaken, rise and join a hunting party.
While they were asleep, they did not realize that they were dreaming....
But when they awoke, they knew. Someday will come a great awakening, when
we will know this life was like a dream....These words may seem strange,
but many years from now we might meet someone who can explain them,
unexpectedly some morning or evening.

In the meantime, we can look clearly at our lives and the life around us,
and Live. Before we start crying and praying to the Universe to take away
our Trials and Tribulations, we might more closely examine what it has
given us. Maybe the "good" things are tests, possibly rather difficult
ones at that, and the "bad" things are gifts to help us grow: problems to
solve, situations to learn to avoid, habits to change, conditions to
accept, lessons to learn, things to transform-all opportunities to find
Wisdom, Happiness, and Truth. To quote William Blake:

It is right it should be so;

Man was made for Joy and Woe;

And when this we rightly know,

Thro' the World we safely go.

Joy and Woe are woven fine,

A Clothing for the soul divine.

Hmm. Everyone seems to have left.

"I'm still here," said Piglet.

"Oh-so you are."

"I enjoyed the stories."

"That's good."

"They helped me to ... reflect on things."

"Things?" Such as-"

"Fear."

"Oh."

"Well, I'm going out on a walk, to do some thinking. I'll be back in a
bit."

"Right you are. Have a pleasant time."

When we see Things As They Are, we find a world of Magic-the world that
has been there all along. And we find ourselves wondering how we ever
missed it. As Henry David Thoreau wrote:

What is a course of history or philosophy, or poetry, no matter how well
selected, or the best society, or the most admirable routine of life,
compared with the discipline of looking always at what is to be seen? Will
you be a reader, a student merely, or a seer? Read your fate, see what is
before you, and walk on into futurity.

And now, here's a Riddle for Piglet, when he returns: If "good" is not
necessarily good, and "bad" not necessarily bad, what is "small"?

THE UPRIGHT HEART

The wind was against them now and Piglet's ears streamed behind him like
banners as he fought his way along,[,]  and it seemed hours before he got
them into the shelter of the Hundred Acre Wood and they stood up straight
again, to listen, a little nervously, to the roaring of the gale among the
treetops.

"Supposing a tree fell down, Pooh, when we were underneath it?"

"Supposing it didn't," said Pooh after careful thought.

Piglet was comforted by this, and in a little while they were knocking and
ringing very cheerfully at Owl's door.

And now it's time for-what's that squeaking noise?

There's not much you can do When you're only Very Small ...

The Great Deeds aren't for you. They're important

As they can be,

But you can't do those things at all.

"Piglet? Whatever in the world-"

"Pooh's been giving me songing lessons," squeaked Piglet.

"Don't you mean singing les- oh, well, no, I guess that's right. Songing
lessons. Oh, he has, has he?"

"Yes."

"Well, I only hope he realizes what he's unleashed upon an unsuspecting
world."

"Hello," said Pooh. "Has Piglet sung you his song?"

"Some of it, at least. He sings awfully high, doesn't he? In the human
world, he'd be known as a Countertenor."

"No," said Pooh. "He can count higher than that. "

"Higher than what?"

"Ten. "

"Who said anything about counting, Pooh?"

"You said that Piglet is a count-to-tenner. And I said-"

"Yes, yes. What I meant was, he sings high." "After all," said Pooh, "he's
a Very Small Animal."

"Indeed," added Piglet. "You can't expect a pig to sing like Pooh. He's a
Bearitone."

"Piglet, what an awful joke."

"Joke?" said Pooh. "Where?"

What was I about to say? Oh, yes. Now we come to the power of the
Sensitive, the Modest, and the Small-a power that all Piglets have in
potential, whether or not they do anything with it. Of all the teachings
of East or West, Taoism places the greatest emphasis on that power, which
in Taoist writings is personified in its varying aspects as the Child, the
Mysterious Female, and the Spirit of the Valley. Significantly, these are
also personifications of the Tao itself.

Let's begin our examination of the Sensitive, the Modest, and the Small by
considering Sensitivity. In the West, sensitivity is considered a Minus
rather than a Plus. ("Oh, you're just too sensitive!") But even in
denouncing it as something to get rid of, the West acknowledges a little
of its tremendous power. For example, it is widely recognized that being
negatively sensitive about one's health through worry-imagery and
pessimistic self-talk can make and keep one sick. What is not so widely
recognized, however, is that being positively sensitive about one's
health-"listening" to the body, avoiding damaging influences, imagining
and directing healing energy, visualizing perfect health, and so on-can
make and keep one well, as an increasing number of people are discovering,
some of them through curing themselves of "incurable" illnesses.

Sensitivity and skill develop together-as one of them increases in the
process of learning something, so does the other. A skilled ballet dancer
is aware of his muscles as they stretch and contract, tighten and relax,
through exercise, practice, and performance. Applying that sensitivity, he
leaps, twirls and lands without apparent effort. A skilled athlete of any
sort is aware of just how to move, how to hit or throw a ball in the right
way at the right time, how to do this or that in order to score a point.
Our last T'ai Chi Ch'iian teacher had developed his awareness to such an
extent that he would immediately know when anyone was trying to sneak up
behind him. In their areas, at least, the masters of any such skills are
very sensitiveand therefore very alert. As Chuang-tse wrote:

Those of perfect Virtue cannot be burned by fire, nor drowned by water.
Neither can they be harmed by heat or cold, nor injured by wild animals.
It is not that they are indifferent-it is that they discriminate between
where they may safely rest and where they will be in danger. Watchful in
prosperity and adversity, cautious in their comings and goings, nothing
can injure them.

Nothing, that is, as long as they avoid having tea in a storm up in a tree
at Owl's house .. .

There was a loud cracking noise.

"Look out!" cried Pooh. "Mind the clock! Out of the way, Piglet! Piglet,
I'm falling on you!"

"Help!" cried Piglet.

Pooh's side of the room was slowly tilting upwards and his chair began
sliding down on Piglet's. The clock slithered gently along the
mantlepiece, collecting vases on the way, until they all crashed together
on to what had once been the floor, but was now trying to see what it
looked like as a wall. [The portrait of] Uncle Robert, who was going to be
the new hearthrug, and was bringing the rest of his wall with him as
carpet, met Piglet's chair just as Piglet was expecting to leave it, and
for a little while it became very difficult to remember which was really
the north. Then there was another loud crack ... Owl's room collected
itself feverishly ... and there was silence.

Well-so Owl's house in the trees is now on Ground Level. That's a fine
piece of cake.

"Cake?" said Pooh.

The word for Taoist sensitivity is Cooperate. As Lao-tse wrote, "The
skilled walker leaves no tracks"-he is sensitive to (and therefore
respectful toward) his surroundings and works with the natural laws that
govern them. Like a chameleon, he blends in with What's There. And he does
this through the awareness that comes from reducing the Ego to nothing. As
Chuang-tse put it:

To him who dwells not in himself, the forms of things reveal themselves as
they are. He moves like water, reflects like a mirror, responds like an
echo. His lightness makes him seem to disappear. Still as a clear lake, he
is harmonious in his relations with those around him, and remains so
through profit and loss. He does not precede others, but follows them
instead.

"But where's the cake?" asked Pooh.

"Please, Pooh-I'm in the middle of this. Go look in the refrigerator."

"There's nothing in the refrigerator."

"Oh? Well, don't blame me."

The Taoist alchemist and herbalist Ko Hung described one of the benefits
of nonegotistical awareness: contentment.

The contented man can be happy with what appears to be useless. He can
find worthwhile occupation in forests and mountains. He stays in a small
cottage and associates with the simple. He would not exchange his worn
clothes for the imperial robes, nor the load on his back for a four-horse
carriage. He leaves the jade in the mountain and the pearls in the sea.
Wherever he goes, whatever he does, he can be happy-he knows when to stop.
He does not pick the brief-blossoming flower; he does not travel the
dangerous road. To him, the ten thousand possessions are dust in the wind.
He sings as he travels among the green mountains.

He finds sheltering branches more comforting than red-gated mansions, the
plow in his hands more rewarding than the prestige of titles and banners,
fresh mountain water more satisfying than the feasts of the wealthy. He
acts in true freedom. What can competition for honors mean to him? What
attraction can anxiety and greed possibly hold? Through simplicity he has
Tao, and from Tao, everything. He sees the light in the "darkness," the
clear in the "cloudy," the speed in the "slowness," the full in the
"empty." The cook creating a meal with his own hands has as much honor in
his eyes as a famous singer or high official. He has no profits to gain,
no salary to lose; no applause, no criticism. When he looks up, it is not
in envy. When he looks down, it is not with arrogance. Many look at him,
but nobody sees him. Calm and detached, he is free from all danger, a
dragon hidden among men.

Hidden. That reminds us of What's-his-name.

In a corner of the room, the table-cloth began to wriggle. Then it wrapped
itself into a ball and rolled across the room.

Then it jumped up and down once or twice, and put out two ears.

It rolled across the room again, and unwound itself.

With the reappearance of Piglet, we come to the second admired
characteristic we mentioned at the beginning of the chapter: Modesty.
Which brings us to one of our favorite selections from the writings of
Chuang-tse:

On a trip to Sung, Yang-tse spent the night at an inn. The innkeeper had
two wives, one beautiful, the other very plain. The plain one was treated
with honor and affection, but the beautiful one was ignored. The next day,
Yang-tse asked a boy of the household why.

He replied, "The beautiful one knows that she is beautiful; the plain one
knows that she is plain."

When Yang-tse returned, he addressed, his disciples: "Remember this, my
followers. Put away your pride, and act upon your Virtue. If you do this,
how can you not be loved?"

As that story so perfectly sums up the subject of Modesty, we think, let's
go on to that of the Small.

"Have you anything to say about the Small, Piglet?"

"Why, yes," he replied. "I was just rehearsing it (ahem)."

There's not much you can be

When you're not so very tall,

And the Life you long for

Is so high up

You can't reach it-

You're a Very Small Animal.

What if I could be Bigger, and

What if I could be Tall?

Think what I could accomplish then.

As it is, I'm too small,

Much too small.

"Thank you, Piglet. That's about what I thought you'd say."

To the typical mind of the West, Bigger is Better: The large man is a
better fighter than the little man, the huge corporation is superior to
the small company, the adult is wiser than the child. The Taoist attitude
is: Not so.

Is the large man a better fighter than the little man? Our previously
mentioned T'ai Chi Ch'uan teacher, a small man even by Chinese standards,
was once trapped in a Hong Kong alley by a gang of armed thugs. They lost.
In martial arts, as in Real Life, it's not the big opponent one needs to
watch out for; it's the little one. There are many reasons, some physical
(lower center of gravity), some mental (tricks learned from being the
Underdog), some emotional (without interference from a Muscleman Ego, one
can move very fast). Large men tend to be lazy and slow, relying on their
muscles to carry them through a situation. Little men tend to be far more
energetic, flexible, and alert, with finer-tuned nervous systems and less
weight to haul around. We've so often seen small fighters dance around
their larger opponents, strike them at will and dance out of range, that
we laugh when we're told what a Big Bruiser so-andso is. What does it
matter if he's as big as a boxcar, if he can't catch you? To illustrate
what we mean, here's the Chinese story of "The Monkeys and the
Grasshoppers":

One day a long time ago, some monkeys who lived on a mountain decided they
would rather live in the valley below, where it was warmer. But when they
went down to the valley, they were bothered by grasshoppers. So they tried
to persuade the grasshoppers to leave, first by coaxing and then by
threats. But the grasshoppers refused to go. "You puny creatures!" roared
the Head Monkey. "If you won't leave, we'll force you out! Tomorrow we'll
fight you to the finish!" "All right," said the Head Grasshopper. "If
that's the way you want it. "

The next day the monkeys marched into the valley, armed with heavy clubs.
"Come out, grasshoppers!" they called. "Where are you?" "Here we are!"
answered the grasshoppers, as they leaped onto their opponents. Whack,
whack, whack went the clubs, as one monkey battered another. The
grasshoppers were too fast for them. The Head Monkey found to his disgust
that the Head Grasshopper had landed on his nose. "I'll get him, boss!"
said the monkey next to him. He struck a ferocious blow with his club,
missing the grasshopper (who by then had leaped away) but squashing the
Head Monkey's nose deep between his eyes. And so it went with one monkey's
nose after another. Finally the monkeys staggered away, and the valley was
peaceful once again.

And that is why monkeys avoid the valleys, and why they have squashed
noses.

For the second point: Is the huge corporation superior to the small
company? That sort of Dinosaur Mentality didn't work very well for the
dinosaurs in the long run, and it doesn't seem to be working very well for
businesses, either, as time goes by.

As we are told in school, the dinosaurs were the most successful creatures
on earth-for a while. But geographic and climatic changes eliminated them
because they couldn't Adapt, and couldn't compete with the smaller, faster
creatures that superceded them. Their most plentiful descendants alive
today, scientists tell us, are birdssmall, adaptable, and mobile.

For some time now, big companies have been buying smaller companies, only
to be bought in turn by giant corporations, which are then bought by
multinational conglomerates. The bigger they grow, and the more
interdependent they make themselves in the process, the more vulnerable
they become. Bigness easily becomes its own worst enemy. As recent events
continue to show, it doesn't take all that much to put a large corporation
in trouble. And the bigger it is, the harder it will fall. Survival of the
Fattest may have been the rule of business prosperity for a while. But
it's now being supplanted by the Success of the Small. In search of
something new and useful, creative businessmen have begun to study the
fighting tactics of the Samurai. They might do better, we think, to read
the Tao Te Ching: "The hard and mighty shall fall; the flexible and
yielding shall survive." Just a thought.

There was a disturbance behind the table in the other corner of the room,
and Owl was with them

again.

"Ah, Piglet," said owl, looking very much annoyed; "where's Pooh?"

"I'm not quite sure," said Pooh.

For the final point on Bigger is Better: Is the adult wiser than the
child? On the individual level, of course, the answer depends on which
adult and which child. But beyond that, wisdom is to the Taoist a child's
state. Children are born with it; most adults have lost it, or a good deal
of it. And those who haven't are, in one way or another, like children. Is
it a Mere Coincidence that the Chinese suffix tse, which has come to mean
"master," literally means child? As the
Confucianist-yetsurprisingly-Taoist philosopher Meng-tse wrote,

"Great man retains child's mind." And  as the following story by
Chuang-tse s[h]ows, the great  man  respects the child's mind as well:

Accompanied by six of his wisest men, the Yellow Emperor journeyed to
Chu-T'zu Mountain, to speak to the mystic Ta Kuei. In the wilderness of
Hsiang Ch'eng, the procession lost its way. After wandering for some time,
the men came upon a boy tending horses. "Do you know the way to Chu T'zu
Mountain?" they asked him. "I do," the boy replied. "In that case," they
said, "would you know where we might find the hidden dwelling of the
hermit Ta Kuei?" "Yes," he answered, "I can tell you." "What a fascinating
child!" said the emperor to his companions. "He knows this much ... Let me
test him." He stepped from his carriage, and called the boy to him.

"Tell me," said the Yellow Emperor. "If you were in charge of the empire,
how would you go about ruling it?"

"I know only the tending of horses," the boy re  plied. "Is ruling the
empire any different from that?"

Not satisfied, the emperor questioned him again: "I realize that governing
is hardly your concern. Still, I would like to know if you have ever had
any thoughts about it."

The boy did not answer. The emperor asked him once more. The boy replied
by asking, "Is governing the empire different from tending horses?"

"Explain the tending of horses," said the Yellow Emperor, "and I will tell
you."

"When taking care of horses," said the boy, "we make sure that no harm
comes to them. In doing so, we put aside anything within ourselves that
would injure them. Can ruling a nation differ from that?"

The Yellow Emperor bowed his head twice to the ground. "Heavenly Master!"
he exclaimed.

"Does it have pink icing?" asked Pooh. "Pooh, whatever are you talking
about?"

"The cake."

"What cake?"

"The cake you mentioned. `A fine piece of cake,' you said."

"Oh, that. That was just an expression."

"Oh. "

"Pooh, don't you ever think of anything but your stomach?"

"I hardly ever think about my stomach," said Pooh.

"Well-I'm glad to hear that." "Mostly, I think about food."

"Well!" said Owl. "This is a nice state of things!"

"What are we going to do, Pooh? Can you think of anything?" asked Piglet.

"Well, I had just thought of something," said Pooh. "It was just a little
thing I thought of." And he began to sing:

I lay on my chest

And I thought it best

To pretend I was having an evening rest;

I lay on my tum

And I tried to hum

But nothing particular seemed to come.

My face was flat

On the floor, and that

Is all very well for an acrobat;

But it doesn't seem fair

To a Friendly Bear

To stiffen him out with a basket-chair.

And a sort of sqoze

Which grows and grows

Is not too nice for his poor old nose,

And a sort of squch

Is much too much

For his neck and his mouth

and his ears and such.

"That was all," said Pooh.

Owl coughed in an unadmiring sort of way, and said that, if Pooh was sure
that was all, they could now give their minds to the Problem of Escape.

"Because," said Owl, "we can't go out by what used to be the front door.
Something's fallen on it. "

Returning to Taoist principles for a moment: When we eliminate
interference from the Ego, the energy of the Universal Way can flow
through us unimpeded. Which is one reason why Taoists emphasize the
importance of being Small, as does Lao-tse in the twenty-eighth chapter of
the Tao Te Ching:

Know the masculine,

But keep to the feminine.

Become a river

To all under heaven.

As a river flows,

Move in constant Virtue;

Return to the infant state.

Know the light,

But keep to the shadow.

Become a pattern

To all under heaven.

As a pattern repeats itself,

Act in constant Virtue;

Return to the beginning.

Know the high,

But keep to the low.

Become a valley

To all under heaven.

As a valley provides in abundance,

Give in constant Virtue;

Return to natural simplicity.

When we work with the Power of the Small, we follow the example of the Way
itself, as Laotse pointed out in chapter thirty-four:

The Great Way flows everywhere,

To the left and to the right.

The ten thousand things

Depend on it for life.

It nourishes them all,

Holding nothing back.

It accomplishes what needs to be,

But takes no credit.

It clothes and feeds all things,

Yet does not claim To be their lord.

It asks for nothing in return.

It may be called the Small.

The ten thousand things

Follow it,

Return to it.

Yet it does not claim

To be their lord.

Therefore, it may be called

The Great.

So too the wise may become great,

By becoming small.

Meanwhile, back at Owl's house .. .

"But how else can you get out?" asked Piglet anxiously.

"That is the Problem, Piglet, to which I am asking Pooh to give his mind."

Pooh sat on the floor which had once been a wall, and gazed up at the
ceiling which had once been another wall, with a front door in it which
had once been a front door, and tried to give his mind to it.

"Could you fly up to the letter-box with Piglet on your back?" he asked.

"No," said Piglet quickly. "He couldn't."

Owl explained about the Necessary Dorsal Muscles. He had explained this to
Pooh and Christopher Robin once before, and had been waiting ever since
for a chance to do it again, because it is a thing which you can easily
explain twice before anybody knows what you are talking about.

"Because you see, Owl, if we could get Piglet into the letter-box, he
might squeeze through the place where the letters come, and climb down the
tree and run for help."

Piglet said hurriedly that he had been getting bigger lately, and couldn't
possibly, much as he would like to, and Owl said that he had had his
letter-box made bigger lately in case he got bigger letters, so perhaps
Piglet might, and Piglet said, "But you said the necessary you-know-whats
wouldn't," and Owl said, "No, they won't, so it's no good thinking about
it," and Piglet said, "Then we'd better think of something else," and
began to at once.

"I've thought up another verse and refrain," said Piglet.

"Oh. All right, how do they go?" "Like this ..."

There's not much you can see

When you can't see things at all

They're too far above your head.

They're for someone

Who is Someone,

Not for someone who is like you ...

How can I become Bigger?

How can I become Tall?

When will I stop feeling weak, and

When will I stop feeling small?

"That's all very nice, Piglet. I mean as a song. But it's not getting you
anywhere, you know."

"What do you mean?" asked Piglet.

"I mean, that attitude won't do you any good. If you keep repeating that
sort of thought, you'll just convince yourself that you're powerless.
Isn't that why you feel so afraid?"

"Well," said Piglet, "when you're only a Very Small Animal-"

"If I might make a suggestion ..."

"Yes?"

"First of all, the fears that push you about are not legitimate,
appropriate responses to What Is, such as warnings of danger ahead.
Instead, they're the constricting fantasies of What If: `What if I should
meet a Heffalump, or fall on my face, or make an utter fool of myself?'
Isn't that true?"

"Yes ... I suppose so."

"I would suggest that the next time a What If starts badgering you, look
it straight in the eyes and ask it, `All right, what's the very worst that
could happen?' And when it answers, ask yourself, `What could I do about
it?' You'll find there always will be something. Then you'll see that you
can have power in any situation. And when you realize that, the fears will
go away."

"They will?"

"Especially when you realize where the power comes from. In one way or
another, we're all Very Small Animals, and that's all we need to be. So
why worry about it? All we have to do is live in harmony with the Way, for
the benefit of the world, and let its power work through us. Let it do the
work. "

"Oh," said Piglet.

"For example, I'm not writing this book. That would be Struggle and
Difficulty. Instead, I'm letting the book write itself, through me. That's
Fun and Excitement. It flows along, and I follow as best I can. Day by
day, wherever I go, things come to me and I include them in these pages.
To paraphrase my favorite Haiku writer, Matsuo Basho, `Every bend in the
road brings me new ideas; every dawn gives me fresh feelings.' Writing
with the Way is a journey. And so is everything else. Who knows where the
Way will take us tomorrow, and what it will have us doing?"

"I never thought of it like that," said Piglet.

"So you see, as long as we follow the Way, we won't be intimidated by
fears-neither fear of failure nor fear of success."

"Fear of success? Is there such a thing?"

"There certainly is, and it has a great deal of power over a great many
people. Chuang-tse wrote some things about it. Here's one of them":

Yao was seeing the sights at Hua when the border guardian recognized him
and approached, saying "Ah, Master! Blessings on the Master! May he live
long!"

"Hush!" said Yao.

"May the Master have much wealth!" "Hush!"

"May he have many sons!" "Hush!"

"How is this?" asked the border guardian. "Long life, much wealth, and
many sons are what everyone wishes for. Why do you not want them?"

"Many sons," said Yao, "mean many worries. Much wealth means much trouble.
Long life means long suffering of abuse. These interfere with the
cultivation of Virtue. That is why I do not want them."

"Before," the border guardian replied, "I thought you were a Master. Now I
see you are only a Superior Man. Heaven, in sending you sons, is sure to
have fashioned occupations for them. If you had many sons, and they had
their occupations, what would you have to worry about? If you had much
wealth and shared it with others, what trouble would you have? As for long
life .. .

"The wise man finds his dwelling like a quail, without worries or
struggle. He is fed like a fledgling, by the all-providing Way of Heaven.
He travels through life like a bird in flight, leaving no trace as he
passes. When the empire follows the Way, he shares in the prosperity. When
it loses the Way, he retires and cultivates his Virtue. After many years
of contented living, he leaves this world and rides the white clouds. No
evil will have reached him. He is free from misfortune. What abuse has he
suffered?" With this the border guardian turned and walked away.

Yao followed him. "Wait!" he called. "I would like to ask-"

"Oh, go away!" replied the border guardian.

"That story," I said, "illustrates what the Taoists mean by `Treat gain
and loss as the same.' They mean don't be Intimidated. Don't make a Big
Deal of anything-just accept things as they come to you. The Universe
knows what it's doing. So don't develop a big ego, and don't be afraid."

"Oh," said Piglet. "I see."

"Going out?" I asked.

"Yes," he said. "I'm going to work on my song."

"Owl," said Pooh, "I have thought of something."

"Astute and Helpful Bear," said Owl.

Pooh looked proud at being called a stout and helpful bear, and said
modestly that he just happened to think of it. You tied a piece of string
to Piglet, and you flew up to the letter-box with the other end in your
beak, and you pushed it through the wire and brought it down to the floor,
and you and Pooh pulled hard at this end, and Piglet went slowly up at the
other end. And there you were.

Yes, there you were. Unless, as Owl pointed out, the string should happen
to break .. .

"It won't break," whispered Pooh comfortingly, "because you're a Small
Animal, and I'll stand underneath, and if you save us all, it will be a
Very Grand Thing to talk about afterwards, and perhaps I'll make up a
Song, and people will say `It was so grand what Piglet did that a
Respectful Pooh Song was made about it.' "

Piglet felt much better after this, and when everything was ready, and he
found himself slowly going up to the ceiling, he was so proud that he
would have called out "Look at mel" if he hadn't been afraid that Pooh and
Owl would let go of their end of the string and look at him.

"Up we go!" said Pooh cheerfully.

"The ascent is proceeding as expected," said Owl helpfully. Soon it was
over. Piglet opened the letter-box

and climbed in.

Then, having untied himself, he began to squeeze into the slit, through
which in the old days when front doors were front doors, many an
unexpected letter that WOL had written to himself had come slipping.

He squeezed and he squoze, and then with one last sqooze he was out.

And Victory was theirs. And so was Help and Rescue. Which just goes to
show-

"Here I am again," said Piglet.

"So you are. Another verse, is it?"

"Yes. And refrain."

"Refrain, too? Good-let's hear them."

There's not much you can say

When others, Big and Tall,

With their great muscular

Strength and all,

Find they can't do what you can do,

And you stand there, not feeling small.

What if I had been bigger, and

What if I had been tall?

Think what I would have missed out on-

Not too small, after all.

"Much better," I said. "A great improvement. Well done, Piglet. All
around."

"Thank you," said Piglet, looking a good deal Pinker than before.

"Ah-here are Eeyore and Owl. Come on, everybody-we're off to celebrate
Piglet's Brave Escape! I've a table reserved at the Six Pine Trees. We'll
have to stop at Kanga's for the others, and then-"

"Will there be cake?" asked Pooh hopefully.

"Yes, I believe that's on the menu. Honey cake."

"With-with pink icing?"

"Yes. And there'll be Haycorn Loaf, and-oh, why talk about it? Come on,
Piglet, don't lag behind. "

"Yes, come along," said Pooh. "And bring the rest of your song."

"I'm coming ..."

Why should I have been bigger, then?

Why should I have been tall?

Why should I have been different, then,

After all?

THE DAY OF PIGLET

They had got a rope and were pulling Owl's chairs and pictures and things
out of his old house so as to be ready to put them into his new one. Kanga
was down below tying the things on, and calling out to Owl, "You won't
want this dirty old dishcloth any more, will you, and what about this
carpet, it's all in holes," and Owl was calling back indignantly, "Of
course I dol It's just a question of arranging the furniture properly, and
it isn't a dish-cloth, it's my shawl." Every now and then Roo fell in and
came back on the rope with the next article, which flustered Kanga a
little because she never knew where to look for him. So she got cross with
Owl and said that his house was a Disgrace, all damp and dirty, and it was
quite time it did tumble down. Look at that horrid bunch of toadstools
growing out of the floor therel So Owl looked down, a little surprised
because he didn't know about this, and then gave a short sarcastic laugh,
and explained that that was his sponge, and that if people didn't know a
perfectly ordinary bath-sponge when they saw it, things were coming to a
pretty pass. "Well!" said Kanga, and Roo fell in quickly, crying, "I must
see Owl's

sponge! Oh, there it is! Oh, Owl! Owl, it isn't a sponge, it's a spudge!
Do you know what a spudge is, Owl? It's when your sponge gets all-" and
Kanga said, "Roo, dearl" very quickly, because

that's not the way to talk to anybody who can spell TUESDAY.

Just what is it that Owl's house reminds us of? It seems so familiar,
somehow. Let's go over it as though it were still standing-perhaps that
will help us make the association. Let's see . . . It looks down on all
around it, as if tempting the forces of the natural world to knock it
over. It has been sliding into disrepair for quite some time, as its
proprietor has neglected its necessary maintenance for other things. It .
. . Oh, yes-that's what it reminds us of: our civilization. Will it fall
down, too? We wish we could say, "I wonder what will happen to it." But we
can't say that, because we know.

It's intriguing, and rather Eerie sometimes, how history tends to repeat
itself. The Us First, War Lord Confucianists criticized by Lao-tse and
other ancient Taoists seem to have put on new clothes and come back again
to take charge. Reading the Tao Te Ching's descriptions of the society of
its time, one gets the strangest feeling that they were written the day
before yesterday. So once again, Taoism-for all its great age-seems very
up-to-the-minute. And once again, perhaps it has something to offer.

Because, we believe, it is not exactly Progress for our nation to have
moved from the enlightened era of President John F. Kennedy (was it the
Merest Accident that he quoted occasionally from the Tao Te Ching?) into

an era of scandal-ridden administrations run by Special Interests'
Candidates seemingly bent on dismantling our democracy and destroying the
nation's land, air, and water in the process, while wrapping themselves in
the starry flag of Patriotism. For years now, intelligent, concerned
activists have been Out, and self-centered,
ignoramus conservatives have been In. And that is not what we'd call the
Way of a Healthy Society.
Why these people are called Conservatives is beyond our understanding, as
they never seem to conserve anything. They don't conserve natural
resources. They use them up as quickly as possible. They don't conserve
morality and the family, despite much self-righteous boasting to the
contrary-boasting that falls rather flat when it comes from those who
amass money through commercial enterprises that make a mockery of moral
values and put impoverished families, widows, and orphans into the street.
They certainly don't conserve money. Not taxpayer money, anyway. It would
appear that about the only things they do conserve are the very things the
human race ought to have discarded long ago: narrow-mindedness,
intolerance, coldheartedness, bigotry, machismo, and greed.

The Conservatives (being very religious people, they say) believe that
"God helps those who help themselves." And so they help themselves to
everything they can get their hands on. But don't expect them to help
anyone else. And don't expect them to help the earth.

In recent years, for example, our nation's "conservative" leaders have
started a war to take Kuwait's oil supply back from Iraq, waging that war
by authorizing the bombing of offshore oil rigs (contributing to the
largest oil spill in history), goading the opposing forces into igniting
30 percent of Kuwait's oil wells, killing a quarter of a million people
(many of them civilians far from any military targets) in what is now
known as the most environmentally destructive war in the history of
warfare. The bill: 60 billion dollars. They have trashed the energy
conservation measures of their predecessors, all but eliminated funding
for solar energy research and development, handed the wealthy nuclear
power industry a taxpayer-funded boost, pressed for oil drilling in
wildlife refuges and coastal waters, refused to authorize the longoverdue
and increasingly costly cleanup of toxic waste sites, and so on, and on
and on. With wasteful, destructive "leaders" such as these, who needs
enemies?

Unfortunately for those of us who would prefer to go on to bigger and
better things-such as the advancement of humanity and the assurance of its
survival-the great majority of political leaders now in power seem to care
for nobody but themselves. And, as in days of old, that means War.

At present, billions of American tax dollars are being spent each year on
preparations for war, weapons of war, industries of war-running the nation
into unpayable debt while across the country untaxed gang lords cruise
about in limousines, drug pushers and psychopaths prey on neglected
children, homeless grandmothers push their worldly possessions before them
through the streets in shopping carts, and citizens of all ages contract
Pistol Fever, shooting themselves and each other with handguns at the rate
of sixty-four deaths per day-killing more Americans in twoand-one-half
years than did the sixteen-year Vietnam War (and wounding approximately
one hundred thousand others yearly).

The huge-like-us Soviet Union went Broke feeding the military, and we're
following close behind. Meanwhile, little Germany and little Japan, who
comparatively speaking spend next to nothing on military matters, are
beating us in practically every area of endeavor. What do we receive in
return for the trillions of dollars that we've handed to the Armed Forces
over the past thirty years? Let's see.... Well, we've been provided with
warplanes that don't fly; armored tanks that don't steer; weapons that
don't fire.... No, those don't count. That's what we're told, anyway. Oh,
there must be something.... Ah, yes-half a million tons of hazardous waste
per year. The military is the nation's largest producer of it. What good
that will do us is rather hard to say, however. And toxic waste isn't
exactly the sort of thing we can return to the store for a refund.

Of course, that waste is sooner or later bound to leak out. Fourteen
thousand four hundred military sites are now officially recognized as
toxincontaminated-the cleanup of which is expected to cost taxpayers over
two hundred billion dollarsmaking the U.S. military the country's leading
Earth Abuser. The military now directly manages about twenty-five million
acres of public land and "borrows" around eight million more from agencies
such as the U.S. Forest Service-which allows one hundred sixty-three
military training activities in fifty-seven national forests, involving
three million acres. How respectfully do the Armed Forces treat the land
they manage? Well ...

The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers describes Basin F of Colorado's Rocky
Mountain Arsenal as "the most contaminated square mile on earth."
Thousands of animals and birds have died by drinking or landing in its
water. Nevada's "Bravo 20" range is a sixty-four-square-mile moonscape
after fifty years of battering. In 1983-1984, water from Stillwater
National Wildlife Refuge over-flowed into the area and mixed with the
chemicals in its bomb craters, then receded back into the refuge-killing
seven million fish and thousands of birds. Twenty-three million artillery,
tank, and mortar shells have blasted the forests and meadows of Indiana's
ninety-square-mile Jefferson Proving Ground. Approximately
one-and-one-half million of these rounds have not yet exploded. Many are
below the surface, nearly impossible to locate. An expert has stated that
to decontaminate the once-unspoiled area, it would be necessary to remove
thirty feet of ground using armored bulldozers-thirty feet down for ninety
square miles.

"When the empire follows the Way," wrote Lao-tse, "horses haul wagons of
fertilizer through the fields. When the empire loses the Way, horses haul
war chariots beyond the city walls." And:

I have three treasures,

Which I guard and keep.

The first is compassion.

The second is economy.

The third is humility.

From compassion comes courage.

From economy comes the means to be generous.

From humility comes responsible leadership.

Today, men have discarded compassion

In order to be bold.

They have abandoned economy

In order to be big spenders.

They have rejected humility

In order to be first.

This is the road to death.

The Taoist ideal is to rule by "filling stomachs and building bones"-to
take care of society from the bottom up. Today's leaders in government,
business, and industry "take care of society" by giving more and more
money and power to those at the top. And the Buck Stops There. As Lao-tse
described the situation:

The court is filled with splendor.

The fields are full of weeds.

The granaries are empty.

The powerful wear costly clothing,

Carry sharp swords,

Pamper themselves with lavish food and drink,

And possess riches in extravagance.

These are not princes and lords.

They are robber barons.

Pooh had found Piglet, and they were walking back to the Hundred Acre Wood
together.

"Piglet," said Pooh a little shyly, after they had walked for some time
without saying anything.

"Yes, Pooh?"

"Do you remember when I said that a Respectful Pooh Song might be written
about You Know What?"

"Did you, Pooh?" said Piglet, getting a little pink round the nose. "Oh,
yes, I believe you did."

"It's been written, Piglet."

The pink went slowly up Piglet's nose to his ears, and settled there.

"Has it, Pooh?" he asked huskily. "Aboutabout-That Time When? Do you mean
really written?"

"Yes, Piglet."

The tips of Piglet's ears glowed suddenly, and he tried to say something;
but even after he had

husked once or twice, nothing came out. So Pooh went on.

"There are seven verses in it."

"Seven?" said Piglet as carelessly as he could.

"Ahem," said a squeaky voice.

"Oh-Piglet."

"Yes. Have you seen Pooh?"

"Not lately. But now that you're here, I'd like to ask you something: How
are you being treated these days?"

"Amazingly well," he replied. "Yesterday, two people asked me for my
autograph."

"Ah. Then the news has been getting about."

"Yes-and it's been rather exciting, really."

"And how has Eeyore been behaving toward you?"

"I wouldn't know," said Piglet, "as I haven't seen him for some time."

"Well-that's an improvement. Pardon me. Poor old Eeyore. I ought to be
more tolerant."

"He does have a good deal to worry him," said Piglet. "It's a troublesome
sort of thing, being an Eeyore."

"We all have things to worry about," I said. "You've tended to worry quite
a bit, yourself. But you took action despite your worries. That's the
difference between you and Eeyore. One of the differences, anyway. "

"Just the same," said Piglet. "We oughtn't be too harsh on Eeyore. I'm
sure he'd appreciate a little Kindness."

"I must be running along," he added. "I need to find Pooh. Good-bye."

Well.

"You don't often get seven verses in a Hum, do you, Pooh?"

"Never," said Pooh. "I don't suppose it's ever been heard of before."

"Do the Others know yet?" asked Piglet, stopping for a moment to pick up a
stick and throw it away.

"No," said Pooh. "And I wondered which you would like best. For me to hum
it now, or to wait till we find the others, and then hum it to all of you.

Piglet thought for a little.

"I think what I'd like best, Pooh, is I'd like you to hum it to me
now-and-and then to hum it to all of us. Because then Everybody would hear
it, but I could say 'Oh, yes, Pooh's told me,' and pretend not to be
listening."

If we seem a bit Pigletish at this point, a bit Wary of wholeheartedly
endorsing blind optimism in a business-as-usual future, perhaps it's
because we live in a nation that with 5 percent of the world's population
consumes 25 percent of the world's energy, emits 25 percent of the world's
greenhouse-effect-producing gases, yet does not regulate carbon dioxide
emissions. While Germany and Japan have for years been reaping the
economic benefits of major investments in energy conservationmaking
Germany's plan the model for the entire European Economic Community-our
nation, at everincreasing cost to the economy, has almost totally ignored
such matters and has spent its money on you-know-what.

Yes, we have our doubts about how much love this country truly has for the
earth. Doesn't such love begin at home? Yet even a quick glance inside the
typical American house and garage would reveal a startling number of
anti-earth chemical weapons with which to keep the forces of the natural
world at bay. And outside ... Americans dump sixty-seven million pounds of
pesticide onto the nation's lawns each year-more than farmers use to grow
the nation's pesticide-laden food. Some of the thirty-four chemicals used
in these Lawn Wonders have not been government tested since the 1940s. And
the rest may not be particularly safe, either....

If we appear a bit Hesitant to embrace the belief that we can go on
behaving in such an irresponsible manner without paying the inevitable
price, perhaps it's because we live on a planet on which five to ten
species of life are driven to extinction every day, over seventy-five
acres of trees are cut every minute, one-third of the land area has become
desert, and life-threatening droughts and floods are becoming increasingly
common year after year. In Southern Chile, under the emissions-caused hole
in the earth's ozone layer-which is four times larger than the United
States, and growing-dark glasses, hats, and full clothing in midsummer are
becoming commonplace as carcinogenic ultraviolet-B radiation jumps to an
estimated 1,000 percent of A he pre-hole amount on peak days. In the same
area rabbits, sheep, and fish blinded by apparently
ultraviolet-ray-induced cataracts are being found in ever-larger numbers.

And so when we hear Big Talk about growing environmental awareness and
about man's ability to solve any problem, observing all the while how man
continues to treat the earth and its life forms that run, fly, swim, and
slither away from him for all their lives are worth-those that aren't
rooted in the ground, unable to move-we can't help but wonder Who's
Kidding Whom.

Then we go to the natural world, watch, and listen. And it tells us that a
Great Storm is rising, and that before long things will become very
Interesting-very Interesting, indeed.

We would like to pass along something that we've learned directly from the
earth, as well as from Taoists, Tibetan Buddhists, Native Americans, the
writings of the prophet Isaiah, and others: A new way of life is
coming-one so unlike today's that it would be difficult, if not
impossible, to describe in today's terms. We might call it The Day of
Piglet.

Before it begins its approach, we'd say to those people who haven't had
the inclination or the time to become acquainted with the natural world:
Never mind-you'll be getting acquainted with it, anyway. Because over the
next few years, the natural world will be coming to you (although not
necessarily in the way you'd like it to). Perhaps you might benefit by
beginning your acquaintance with it now. Just a suggestion.

Here lies a tree which Owl (a bird)

Was fond of when it stood on end,

And Owl was talking to a friend

Called Me (in case you hadn't heard)

When something Oo occurred.

For lo! the wind was blusterous

And flattened out his favourite tree;

And things looked bad for he and us

I've never known them wuss.

Then Piglet (PIGLET) thought a thing:

"Courage!" he said. "There's always hope.

I want a thinnish piece of rope.

Or, if there isn't any bring

A thickish piece of string."

"Hello, Eeyore," I said. "We were just talking of you. "

"Behind my back, of course," replied Eeyore. "Skullduggery and whatnot.
One can't know what to expect these days. Even from one's friends. If one
has friends."

"Stop that nonsense, Eeyore. Of course you have friends. Piglet, for one.
He was just now telling me to be Kinder to you, in light of your
difficulties."

"He said that? Little Piglet said that? That fine, upstanding young pig
said that?"

Well.

But to conclude what we were saying ... Whether many people realize it yet
or not, man, the Inferior Animal, has by now proved himself incapable of
keeping his own species-and others-alive for very much longer. So the
earth has begun its own plan to set things right. True to its generous,
gentle, and loving spirit, it has been giving us one warning after another
of what it will be doing-doing, we wish to emphasize, for the sake of
human survival. The sensitive are receiving the messages. But one day when
they least expect it, the insensitive will suddenly find themselves Out in
the Cold, rather like the mammoths found every now and then up north
encased in ice, with oncefresh vegetation in their mouths and an "I saywho
just shut off the heat?" look in their eyes. As we understand it, the
major cause of What's Coming is the present-day denuding of our planet-the
massive overcutting of its forests.

American citizens are spending one billion tax dollars a year to subsidize
the U.S. Forest Service's Giant Giveaway of old-growth public forests to
the logging industry and Japan, causing countless native animals and birds
to lose their homes. By now, ninety-six percent of the nation's original
forest has been removed. Meanwhile, the government of China is permanently
employing forty-five million people in reforestation, making tree planting
a compulsory subject in schools, and decreeing that every Chinese citizen
over the age of eleven must plant from three to five trees a year. (The
smaller children are being taught to plant grasses and flowers.) Maybe
these people Know something.

"Back again, eh? Did you find Pooh?"

"No," replied Piglet. "I don't know where  he is. Hello, Eeyore."

"Ah," said Eeyore. "Friend Piglet. Not like some around here."

"Eeyore," said I, "have you seen Pooh?"

"Yes. I have. He's a rather short, roundish Bear-pleasant personality, but
not particularly intelligent, if you know what I-"

"Yes, yes. But do you know where he is?"

No.

"Oh, here he comes, Piglet-with Rabbit. "

"Pooh," asked Piglet, "did you remember to help Owl remove that-"

"Of course," said Pooh. "I have a phonographic memory, you know."

"You mean," said Rabbit, "a photographic memory.

"No," insisted Pooh. "Phonographic. It goes around and around. Sometimes
it gets stuck. That's why I remember things so well."

"So you took care of it," said Piglet.

"Took care of what?" asked Pooh.

Yes. But let's continue, shall we? We'd like to suggest a thing or two
that might help us through the previously mentioned Approaching
Transition.

As we hope we've shown by now, Taoism is not an Unbending Path. After all,
Taoism follows Tao-and Tao does not operate in a rigid, unyielding manner.
As Lao-tse emphatically stated in the first line of the Tao Te Ching, "The
Way that can be followed [literally: "The Way that can be the Way"] is not
a changeless way" (a line usually translated as "The Way that can be told
is not the Eternal Way"). Traditionally, Taoism is considered the Way of
the Dragon-the dragon being the Chi nese symbol of transformation.
Considering the Bad Press that dragons have received in this part of the
world, perhaps a better image would bethat of the Butterfly. Whatever the
symbol used, Taoism is a Way of Transformation-a way through which
something is changed into something else.

It is fitting that for centuries Taoists have been associated with magic,
as Taoism is, on one level or another, a form of magic-a very practical
form, perhaps, but magic all the same. Here we will briefly describe two
secrets of that magic-two principles of Taoist transformation that may
prove Useful in the coming years. The first is Turn the Negative into
Positive. The second is Attract Positive with Positive. Unlike some other
Taoist secrets, there is little danger of these principles falling into
the Wrong Hands; because in the wrong hands, they won't work. We might add
that they work best for Piglets.

Turn the Negative into Positive is a principle well known in the Taoist
martial arts. Using it for self-defense, you turn your attacker's power to
your benefit by deflecting it back at him. In effect, he swings his fist
and hits himself in the face. And after a while, if he has any
intelligence at all, he stops and leaves you alone.

Transforming negative into positive, you work with whatever comes your
way. If others throw bricks at you, build a house. If they throw tomatoes,
start a vegetable stand. You can often change a situation simply by
changing your attitude toward it. For example, a Traffic jam can be turned
into an Opportunity to Think, or Converse, or Read, or Write a Letter.
When we give up our images of self-importance and our ideas of what should
be, we can help things become what they need to be.
In a similar way, negative personality traits can be transformed.
Self-centered stubbornness can be changed into a selfless devotion to an
altruistic cause. A desire to control others can be turned into a desire
to take control of one's own life and improve oneself-and help others do
the same. A tendency to become lost in details can be transformed into the
ability to connect things carefully together, step by step, to reach a
goal. Indecisiveness can be developed into versatility, and a balanced
point of view. And so on.

So to the letter-box he rose,

While Pooh and Owl said "Oh!" and "Hum!"

And where the letters always come (Called "LETTERS ONLY") Piglet sqoze

His head and then his toes.

O gallant Piglet (PIGLET)! Ho!

Did Piglet tremble? Did he blinch?

No, no, he struggled inch by inch

Through LETTERS ONLY, as I know

Because I saw him go.

The following is one of our favorite examples of someone who turned the
negative into positive.

In January 1838, the immensely popular English writer Charles Dickens was
in Yorkshire under an assumed name, carrying out a personal investigation
of some boarding schools he had been hearing about since his childhood. It
didn't take him long to discover that the rumors he'd heard of brutalized
unwanted children had been understatements. In an accusation against
schoolmaster William Shaw dictated by a pupil who had gone blind in his
care, Dickens read that "Supper consisted of warm milk and water and
bread.... Five boys generally slept in a bed.... On Sunday they had pot
skimmings for tea, in which there was vermin.... There were eighteen boys
there beside himself, of whom two were totally blind.... In November, he
was quite blind and was then sent to a private room where there were nine
other boys [gone] blind...."

On a dreary afternoon, with snow covering the ground, Dickens wandered
through a Yorkshire cemetery, counting the graves of children who had been
turned over to the cheap district "schools." One gravestone read: "Here
lie the remains of George Ashton Taylor ... who died suddenly at Mr.
William Shaw's Academy...." Upon reading the inscription, Dickens
conceived a character for his next novel-a poor wreck of a boy named
Smike, who would be tormented by a vicious schoolmaster and die. That next
novel would be Nicholas Nickleby, and it would be written to focus
attention on the schools Dickens had seen, and-to use his own word for
it-to destroy them. Within a few years after publication of Nicholas
Nickleby, public outrage had caused all of the Yorkshire
prisons-as-schools to be permanently closed.

Throughout his literary career, Charles Dickens drew upon his dark
childhood experiencesshy, impressionable young Charles forced to labor ten
hours a day in a rat-infested warehouse, his father imprisoned for debt-to
shine light into the shadows of complacent Victorian society, exposing the
effects of socially tolerated cruelty and neglect through his
"entertainments." For he worked as an entertainer rather than reformer. He
was wary of social reformers, as they tended to turn people away from the
causes they so seriously championed, thereby unwittingly weakening their
own

efforts.

Charles Dickens preferred instead to charm his London-centered audience
with stories of  lightness and humor, creating an atmosphere of warm
security in which readers knew that all problems would be resolved and
goodness would triumph in the end ... And then into this comforting
world-on-paper, he would introduce those whom polite society would prefer
to ignorethe poor, the forgotten, the abused, the steppedon. And a society
that had long looked the other way began to give attention to its
unfortunates.

Coming from a dreary childhood in a shaky family, in which the father was
not much of a father nor the mother much of a mother, Charles Dickens
almost single-handedly created through his influence the solid, supportive
Victorian family and its most colorful expression, the family Christmas
celebration we know today. He was also largely responsible for the modern
(but now endangered) belief that childhood is an extremely important time
of life, one that deserves honor and protection.

During the Christmas season, Dickens-a skilled amateur conjurer-would
entertain the children of his family and friends, transforming a bran box
into a guinea pig, pulling a plum pudding from an empty pan, sending coins
flying through the air, as the children shrieked with laughter.

Charles Dickens was a conjurer of sorts throughout his life, magically
transforming the world around him into something better than it had been
before. In doing so he gave hope to the hopeless, especially the lost,
defenseless children about whom no one of public influence and power had
previously seemed to care. And to them, at least, he was far more than an
entertainer. When he died, his grave at Westminster Abbey was visited by
thousands of admirers. Among the many floral tributes left at the
gravesite were, as his son described them, "small rough bouquets of
flowers tied up with pieces of rag."

He ran and ran, and then he stood

And shouted, "Help for Owl, a bird

And Pooh, a bear!" until he heard

The others coming through the wood

As quickly as they could.

"Help-help and Rescue!" Piglet cried

And showed the others where to go.

Sing ho! for Piglet (PIGLET) ho
And soon the door was opened wide

And we were both outside!

Sing ho! for Piglet, ho! Ho!

"Hello, Kanga. What have you there?"

"The postman was at my house a short while ago," she said, "and he left
this letter for Piglet by mistake."

"He did? That's strange-he's usually here by now. But no delivery, as
yet."

"There may not be for some time," she said. "Tigger's run off with the
mail sack."

"Oh, he has, has he? By now, my catalogues and bills may be lost in the
Hundred Acre Wood. Well, I hope he's made a good job of it."

"I'll seek it out," said Rabbit, taking command of the situation at once.
"And Owl-we'll need you to search from the air. Come with me, Eeyore. And
Pooh, and Piglet-"

"Piglet stays here," I said. "This letter looks Important."

While Piglet's opening his letter, let's take a look at the principle of
Attract Positive with Positive. It may be easier to recognize its power if
we first recall its opposite, the Eeyore Effect. If we tell children often
enough that they are Clumsy, Ugly, Stupid, or Incapable, they will in time
become just that. At some level, the mind accepts and retains repeated
statements and beliefs as the truth, even though they may be far from it.
The sensitivity of Piglets makes them particularly vulnerable to this sort
of influence. But it also makes them more than ordinarily capable of
positive transformation. Which is why Taoism emphasizes the cultivation of
Piglet qualities, as well as the importance of positive attitudes and
values.

"I don't know what to make of this," said Piglet. "Why don't you have a
look?"

"This is impressive, Piglet. It's from Sandhurst University-Pemberton Q.
Throckmorton, M.A., Ph.D., etc."

" `Piglet, Esq. My Dear Sir: The Board of Regents of Sandhurst University
wish me to inform you of their desire to grant you an honorary degree of
Brave Animal (B.A.). We should be most pleased if you could be present at
the awards ceremony, which shall be held on ...'

"Piglet, that's wonderful! An honorary degree from Sandhurst! Well, well.
Now you'll have something to hang on your wall. I didn't know they did
that sort of thing."

Let's see-where were we? Oh, yes.

As a basic example of attracting positive with positive, Taoist medicine
believes that the secrets of health are found in health. So Taoists study
the principles of health and long life-mental and emotional, as well as
physical-and work in cooperation with them. In contrast, industrial
technologydrugs-and-surgery medicine believes that the secrets of health
are found in illness, so it studies disease and death. Consequently, the
typical Western hospital is not so much a place for the rehabilitation of
the ill and injured as it is a battleground on which medical soldiers,
armed with the latest, most expensive weapons, wage relentless war against
Unhealth.

A similarly negative, warlike approach can be seen at work in the world of
business, especially in its Western half. A successful individual appears
to succeed because he is Aggressive-he chases after things and gets them.
Chances are his positive attitude attracts those things to him and creates
opportunities for success to happen. But chances are onlookers see
Aggression succeeding, rather than Attitude. So that's what they imitate.
And, since aggression attracts more aggression, the want-to-be-successful
turn business into Busyness, creating an atmosphere of increasing
combativeness and negativity in which relatively few are likely to be
successful-and even fewer are likely to be happy.

"Know the masculine, but keep to the feminine.... Return to the infant
state." "Children, who play life, discern its true law and relations more
clearly than men, who ... think that they are wiser by experience, that
is, by failure." "Great man retains child's mind." The great man, we would
say, plays like a child and attracts like a woman. His play may be serious
and his attraction seem masculine on its surface, but it is childlike and
feminine nevertheless.

And that brings us to someone we consider the greatest Piglet of all time,
who changed his life and the lives of millions by applying the tremendous
power available to those who attract positive with positive. We will
introduce him with these words by Chuang-tse:

If a great master ruled the empire, he would stimulate the minds of the
people by working in harmony with them, so they carried out his teachings
unconsciously and without rebelling. Under his influence they would reform
their manners, the evil and violence within them would be extinguished,
and they would move forward as individuals acting for the common good, as
if they did so on their own initiative.

Could such a leader be compared to even the greatest names in recorded
history? He would come from a time before any of them existed. His only
desire would be to bring other minds to rest in the Virtue of those
long-forgotten days.

As a small boy, Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was frail and shy. "My books
and my lessons were my sole companions," he later wrote. "To be at school
at the stroke of the hour and to run back home as soon as the school
closed-that was my daily habit. I literally ran back, because I could not
bear to talk to anybody. " For years he would not go out at night. As a
young man, he went to England to study law. "Even when I paid a social
call," he wrote, "the presence of half a dozen or more people would strike
me dumb."

But Mohandas Gandhi was a Learner. He learned from his studies. He learned
from being the perpetual Piglet. And from his parents he learned, in time,
some of the most important lessons of his life.

From his father he learned the importance of bravery, generosity, and
unwavering adherence to the principles of morality and truth. From his
mother he learned the importance of gentleness, modesty, and
consideration, as well as the flexible strength that enables one to
overcome through yielding. From both he learned that if one wants positive
results, one must be positive, and that goodness persistently applied will
always triumph over evil, even though it may seem to take a good deal of
time doing so.

Eventually, through applying what he learned to the advancement of one
Underdog Cause after another, Gandhi became known as quite a fighter,
winning battles that many older, more experienced campaigners told him
could not be won. He not only won them; he did so by, as the Chinese
saying puts it, "fighting without fighting."

Encountering massive, statutory discrimination against Indians in South
Africa, Gandhi began a campaign of nonviolent resistance. In jail for his
respectfully uncompliant behavior, he read and was inspired by Henry David
Thoreau's essay "Civil Disobedience." But words like "resistance" and
"disobedience" bothered him. Wanting a more positive term, he and a cousin
came up with Satyagraha, or Truth Power.

Gandhi said that Truth Power would overcome opponents by changing them
with respectful, patient persistence-transforming them, not annihilating
them. Again and again, he was told it would not work. And again and again,
despite overwhelming odds, it did.

In South Africa, Truth Power brought about the Indian Relief Bill. In
India, it achieved the granting of democratic reforms; united
long-separated political territories, parties, and factions; stopped civil
war; revived home industries; freed the nation from British rule; and
freed the "untouchables" from the agesold caste system that had persecuted
and imprisoned them. It earned Gandhi-who held no government office, but
led India just the same-a popular respect so high that he could exact
political concessions by fasting. And it earned for him, despite his
strong distaste for it, the title of Mahatma, Great Soul. Gandhi insisted
that he was no god-the success of Satyagraha in his life, he said, showed
that anyone could achieve similar results.

Wherever Gandhi went, he transformed situations and lives. As one friend
and biographer wrote, "He changed human beings by regarding them not as
what they thought they were but as though they were what they wished to
be, and as though the good in them was all of them."

Many descriptions have been written of M.K. Gandhi and his Truth Power
movement. But our favorite has never, we believe, been quoted. It was
written by Lao-tse centuries before Mohandas Gandhi's birth, in chapter
after chapter of the Tao Te Ching:

Nothing in the world is more yielding and gentle than water. Yet it has no
equal for conquering the resistant and tough. The flexible can overcome
the unbending; the soft can overcome the hard.

Why is the sea the king of ten thousand streams? Because it lies beneath
them. Therefore, if the great man would rule the people, he must put
himself below them. If he would lead them, he must put himself behind.
Then they will neither feel oppressed by his weight nor threatened by his
prominence. The world will delight in pushing him forward, and will never
tire of him.

A good commander does not rush ahead. A good fighter does not show anger.
A good conquerer does not antagonize. A good employer does not act
superior. This is called "the Virtue of not striving," "making use of the
abilities of men," and "matching heaven"-the extreme limit of the
ancients.

I am good to those who are good. I am good to those who are not good. And
so all attain goodness. I am sincere to the sincere. I am sincere to the
insincere. And so all attain sincerity.

Fine weapons are instruments of evil. All creatures hate them. Therefore,
followers of the Way do not use them.... To rejoice over victory by
violence is to rejoice over slaughter. He who rejoices over slaughter
cannot unite all within the empire.... The wise ruler sees a military
triumph as a funeral.

The violent die violently-that is the foundation of my teaching.

Yield and prevail. Bend and be straightened. Empty and be filled.... The
great man embraces the One, and becomes its model to the empire. Not
showing off, he shines. Not asserting himself, he becomes known. Not
taking credit, he is acclaimed. Not boasting, he endures. He does not
strive against others, so others do not contend with him. The ancients
said, "Yield and prevail." Is that a worthless saying? Put it into
practice, and all things will come to you.

Many say that Lao-tse's advice to those who would rule (or manage their
own lives) is pleasant sounding but impractical-that in real life it
couldn't work. Yet in real life it did work. One might even say it worked
miracles. But Mohandas K. Gandhi wouldn't have put it that way, any more
than Lao-tse would have. He knew all too well what such "miracles" consist
of: the patient, persistent application of the laws of spiritual
transformation, especially that of Attract Positive with Positive.

"We're back!" said Pooh.

"Mission Accomplished," announced Rabbit.

"And we've quite a surprise for Piglet," said Owl.

"So you have. All this mail-is for Piglet?"

"So it is," said Pooh.

"From Admirers," Owl added.

"For me?" said Piglet, in a throaty sort of squeak. "I-I don't know what
to say."

"Then don't say anything," remarked Eeyore gloomily.

"Eeyore," I cautioned. "Remember what Piglet said about-"

"I only meant," explained Eeyore, brightening considerably, "that in cases
of this sort, there is nothing one can say."

"That's better. "

"Especially if one is Exceptionally Modest and Self-Effacing. Like Piglet.
"

"Much better."

"Or like myself." "Hmmmmm."

As Taoists have long observed and remarked on, something taken to its
extreme turns into its opposite: Extreme Yang (masculine) becomes Yin
(feminine), and so on. The present age of manan extreme if there ever was
one-might well be called the Age of the Warrior. Man against man, man
against the earth ... So, according to the Taoist principle, the coming
age will be an Age of the Healer, or something of the sort. But first will
come what could be called a Great Purification.

As our planet takes action to cast out its manmade poisons and heal its
man-caused wounds, many human inhabitants will no doubt give way to fear.
Many will cling to seemingly powerful we're God's-chosen-people religions,
hoping that by so doing they will be saved from the wrath of a Vengeful
God (not recognizing that the approaching "vengeance" will in reality be
man's own actions coming back at him-and not recognizing that the Infinite
Universal Power is far more than the narrow-minded gatekeeper of an
exclusive Spiritual Country Club). Many will find themselves in the wrong
place at the wrong time, because they did not pay enough attention to what
the natural world was telling them. And many will curse the world, and
believe that they have been cursed by it.

But in reality we are the most fortunate generation since recorded human
history began. For when the necessary cleansing is over, we will witness a
magical transformation of the world around us by the forces of the earth.
And we will see for ourselves what the ancient Taoists meant by the Age of
Perfect Virtue.

When the remains of today's anti-earth civilization have been cleared
away, we will find ourselves in the state of paradise that existed before
the Great Separation occurred. Man's lesson will have been
learned-permanently, without the slightest doubt. The wise leadership and
lighthanded government described by Lao-tse and practiced by Mohandas
Gandhi will be universal. And the Day of Piglet will be here.

FAREWELL

We have decided to conclude this Taoist Exposition, or Expotition, or
whatever-it-is, with three quotations from Here and There. The first is a
Buddhist saying, the second is a selection from the writings of Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle, and the third is our abbreviated retelling of a story by Hans
Christian Andersen. Just trying to be democratic, you know.

"You do like to borrow things, don't you?" said Piglet.

"Yes," added Eeyore. "And he never puts them back."

Anyway, first we have the Buddhist saying:

In the world of truth, there is no East, no West. Where then is the North,
the South? Illusion makes the world close in. Enlightenment opens it on
every side.

Next, Sherlock Holmes, in "The Naval Treaty":

"There is nothing in which deduction is so necessary as in religion," said
he, leaning with his back against the shutters. "It can be built up as an
exact science by the reasoner. Our highest assurance of the goodness of
Providence seems to me to rest in the flowers. All other things, our
powers, our desires, our food, are all really necessary for our existence
in the first instance. But this rose is an extra. Its smell and its colour
are an embellishment of life, not a condition of it. It is only goodness
which gives extras, and so I say again that we have much to hope from the
flowers."

And finally, our shortened version of "The Nightingale":

The emperor of China loved to listen to the singing of the nightingale,
which brought him great contentment. One day he was presented with a
mechanical bird covered with jewels and gold. To the emperor's amazement,
it sang the nightingale's song with perfect clockwork precision, whenever
he wanted it to. It quickly became the sensation of the empire-from
peasant children to court officials, everyone (or almost everyone) admired
the wonderful bird, which sang perfectly, over and over. Ignored and
forgotten, the real bird flew away.

But after some time, the clockwork bird broke down. Without its song to
soothe him, the emperor became ill. His condition grew worse, until he was
nearly at the point of death. Just then, a nightingale alighted outside
the window, and began to sing. His will to live restored, the emperor
recovered.

And now, since this is his book, Piglet's going to give us all a song.

"Are you ready, Piglet?"

"Yes, I (hep) think so (hep!)" said Piglet, hiccuping nervously. "It goes
like this ... "

Let's find a Way Today

That can take us to tomorrow-

Follow that Way,

A Way like flowing water.

Let's leave

Behind

The things that do not matter,

And turn

Our lives

To a more important chapter.

Let's take the time,

Let's try to find

What real life has to offer.

And maybe then We'll find again

What we had long forgotten.

Like a friend,

True 'til the end,

It will help us onward.

The sun is high,

The road is wide,

And it starts where we are standing.

No one knows

How far it goes,

For the road is never-ending.

It goes

Away,

Beyond what we have thought of; It flows

Away,

Away like flowing water.

"Perfect!" I said. "I knew you could do it."

"Have we reached the end?" asked Piglet.

"Yes," I replied. "I suppose so."

"It seems  to be the end," said Pooh.

"It does. And yet-"

"Yes, Piglet?"

"For me, it also seems like a beginning."
