Darkly Dreaming Dexter
by Jeff Lindsay

Doubleday

NEW YORK • LONDON • TORONTO • SYDNEY • AUCKLAND


Darkly dreaming Dexter : a novel by Jeffry Lindsay.—1st ed.
 

1. Serial murderers—Fiction. 2. Serial murders—Fiction.  3.
Vigilantes—Fiction. I. Title.
Copyright © 2004 by Jeff Lindsay
All Rights Reserved


www.randomhouse.com/vintage <http://www.randomhouse.com/vintage>


v1.0

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

THIS BOOK WOULD NOT HAVE BEEN POSSIBLE without the generous technical
and spiritual help of Einstein and the Deacon. They represent what is
best about Miami cops, and they taught me some of what it means to do
this very tough job in a tougher place.

I would also like to thank a number of people who made some very helpful
suggestions, especially my wife, the Barclays, Julio S., Dr. and Mrs. A.
L. Freundlich, Pookie, Bear, and Tinky.

I am deeply indebted to Jason Kaufman for his wisdom and insight in
shaping the book.

Thanks also to Doris, the Lady of the Last Laugh.

And very special thanks to Nick Ellison, who is everything an agent is
supposed to be but almost never is.

/For Hilary
who is everything to me/

CHAPTER 1

MOON. GLORIOUS MOON. FULL, FAT, REDDISH moon, the night as light as
day, the moonlight flooding down across the land and bringing joy, joy,
joy. Bringing too the full-throated call of the tropical night, the soft
and wild voice of the wind roaring through the hairs on your arm, the
hollow wail of starlight, the teeth-grinding bellow of the moonlight off
the water.

All calling to the Need. Oh, the symphonic shriek of the thousand hiding
voices, the cry of the Need inside, /the entity/, the silent watcher,
the cold quiet thing, the one that laughs, the Moondancer. The me that
was not-me, the thing that mocked and laughed and came calling with its
hunger. With the Need. And the Need was very strong now, very careful
cold coiled creeping crackly cocked and ready, very strong, very much
ready now—and still it waited and watched, and it made me wait and watch.

I had been waiting and watching the priest for five weeks now. The Need
had been prickling and teasing and prodding at me to find one, find the
next, find this priest. For three weeks I had known he was it, he was
next, we belonged to the Dark Passenger, he and I together. And that
three weeks I had spent fighting the pressure, the growing /Need/,
rising in me like a great wave that roars up and over the beach and does
not recede, only swells more with every tick of the bright night's clock.

But it was careful time, too, time spent making sure. Not making sure of
the priest, no, I was long sure of him. Time spent to be certain that it
could be done right, made neat, all the corners folded, all squared
away. I could not be caught, not now. I had worked too hard, too long,
to make this work for me, to protect my happy little life.

And I was having too much fun to stop now.

And so I was always careful. Always tidy. Always prepared ahead of time
so it would be /right/. And when it was right, take extra time to be
sure. It was the Harry way, God bless him, that farsighted perfect
policeman, my foster father. Always be sure, be careful, be exact, he
had said, and for a week now I had been sure that everything was just as
Harry-right as it could be. And when I left work this night, I knew this
was it. This night was the Night. This night felt different. This night
it would happen, /had/ to happen. Just as it had happened before. Just
as it would happen again, and again.

And tonight it would happen to the priest.

His name was Father Donovan. He taught music to the children at St.
Anthony's Orphanage in Homestead, Florida. The children loved him. And
of course he loved the children, oh very much indeed. He had devoted a
whole life to them. Learned Creole and Spanish. Learned their music,
too. All for the kids. Everything he did, it was all for the kids.

Everything.

I watched him this night as I had watched for so many nights now.
Watched as he paused in the orphanage doorway to talk to a young black
girl who had followed him out. She was small, no more than eight years
old and small for that. He sat on the steps and talked to her for five
minutes. She sat, too, and bounced up and down. They laughed. She leaned
against him. He touched her hair. A nun came out and stood in the
doorway, looking down at them for a moment before she spoke. Then she
smiled and held out a hand. The girl bumped her head against the priest.
Father Donovan hugged her, stood, and kissed the girl good night. The
nun laughed and said something to Father Donovan. He said something back.

And then he started toward his car. Finally: I coiled myself to strike and—

Not yet. A janitorial service minivan stood fifteen feet from the door.
As Father Donovan passed it, the side door slid open. A man leaned out,
puffing on a cigarette, and greeted the priest, who leaned against the
van and talked to the man.

Luck. Luck again. Always luck on these Nights. I had not seen the man,
not guessed he was there. But he would have seen me. If not for Luck.

I took a deep breath. Let it out slow and steady, icy cold. It was only
one small thing. I had not missed any others. I had done it all right,
all the same, all the way it had to be done. It would be /right/.

Now.

Father Donovan walked toward his car again. He turned once and called
something. The janitor waved from the doorway to the orphanage, then
stubbed out his cigarette and disappeared inside the building. Gone.

Luck. Luck again.

Father Donovan fumbled for his keys, opened his car door, got into his
car. I heard the key go in. Heard the engine turn over. And then—

/NOW/.

I sat up in his backseat and slipped the noose around his neck. One
quick, slippery, pretty twist and the coil of fifty-pound-test fishing
line settled tight. He made a small ratchet of panic and that was it.

“You are mine now,” I told him, and he froze as neat and perfect as if
he had practiced, almost like he heard the other voice, the laughing
watcher inside me.

“Do exactly as I say,” I said.

He rasped half a breath and glanced into his rearview mirror. My face
was there, waiting for him, wrapped in the white silk mask that showed
only my eyes.

“Do you understand?” I said. The silk of the mask flowed across my lips
as I spoke.

Father Donovan said nothing. Stared at my eyes. I pulled on the noose.

“Do you understand?” I repeated, a little softer.

This time he nodded. He fluttered a hand at the noose, not sure what
would happen if he tried to loosen it. His face was turning purple.

I loosened the noose for him. “Be good,” I said, “and you will live longer.”

He took a deep breath. I could hear the air rip at his throat. He
coughed and breathed again. But he sat still and did not try to escape.

This was very good.

We drove. Father Donovan followed my directions, no tricks, no
hesitations. We drove south through Florida City and took the Card Sound
Road. I could tell that road made him nervous, but he did not object. He
did not try to speak to me. He kept both hands on the wheel, pale and
knotted tight, so the knuckles stood up. That was very good, too.

We drove south for another five minutes with no sound but the song of
the tires and the wind and the great moon above making its mighty music
in my veins, and the careful watcher laughing quietly in the rush of the
night's hard pulse.

“Turn here,” I said at last.

The priest's eyes flew to mine in the mirror. The panic was trying to
claw out of his eyes, down his face, into his mouth to speak, but—

“Turn!” I said, and he turned. Slumped like he had been expecting this
all along, waiting for it forever, and he turned.

The small dirt road was barely visible. You almost had to know it was
there. But I knew. I had been there before. The road ran for two and a
half miles, twisting three times, through the saw grass, through the
trees, alongside a small canal, deep into the swamp and into a clearing.

Fifty years ago somebody had built a house. Most of it was still there.
It was large for what it was. Three rooms, half a roof still left, the
place completely abandoned now for many years.

Except the old vegetable garden out in the side yard. There were signs
that somebody had been digging there fairly recently.

“Stop the car,” I said as the headlights picked up the crumbling house.

Father Donovan lurched to obey. Fear had sealed him into his body now,
his limbs and thoughts all rigid.

“Turn off the motor,” I told him, and he did.

It was suddenly very quiet.

Some small something chittered in a tree. The wind rattled the grass.
And then more quiet, silence so deep it almost drowned out the roar of
the night music that pounded away in my secret self.

“Get out,” I said.

Father Donovan did not move. His eyes were on the vegetable garden.

Seven small mounds of earth were visible there. The heaped soil looked
very dark in the moonlight. It must have looked even darker to Father
Donovan. And still he did not move.

I yanked hard on the noose, harder than he thought he could live
through, harder than he knew could happen to him. His back arched
against the seat and the veins stood out on his forehead and he thought
he was about to die.

But he was not. Not yet. Not for quite some time, in fact.

I kicked the car door open and pulled him out after me, just to let him
feel my strength. He flopped to the sandy roadbed and twisted like an
injured snake. The Dark Passenger laughed and loved it and I played the
part. I put one boot on Father Donovan's chest and held the noose tight.

“You have to listen and do as I say,” I told him. “You /have/ to.” I
bent and gently loosened the noose. “You should know that. It's
important,” I said.

And he heard me. His eyes, pounding with blood and pain and leaking
tears onto his face, his eyes met mine in a rush of understanding and
all the things that had to happen were there for him to see now. And he
saw. And he knew how important it was for him to be just /right/. He
began to know.

“Get up now,” I said.

Slowly, very slowly, with his eyes always on mine, Father Donovan got
up. We stood just like that for a long time, our eyes together, becoming
one person with one need, and then he trembled. He raised one hand
halfway to his face and dropped it again.

“In the house,” I said, so very softly. In the house where everything
was ready.

Father Donovan dropped his eyes. He raised them to me but could not look
anymore. He turned toward the house but stopped as he saw again the dark
dirt mounds of the garden. And he wanted to look at me, but he could
not, not after seeing again those black moonlit heaps of earth.

He started for the house and I held his leash. He went obediently, head
down, a good and docile victim. Up the five battered steps, across the
narrow porch to the front door, pushed shut. Father Donovan stopped. He
did not look up. He did not look at me.

“Through the door,” I said in my soft command voice.

Father Donovan trembled.

“Go through the door now,” I said again.

But he could not.

I leaned past him and pushed the door open. I shoved the priest in with
my foot. He stumbled, righted himself, and stood just inside, eyes
squeezed tight shut.

I closed the door. I had left a battery lamp standing on the floor
beside the door and I turned it on.

“Look,” I whispered.

Father Donovan slowly, carefully, opened one eye.

He froze.

Time stopped for Father Donovan.

“No,” he said.

“Yes,” I said.

“Oh, no,” he said.

“Oh, yes,” I said.

He screamed, “NOOOO!”

I yanked on the noose. His scream was cut off and he fell to his knees.
He made a wet croaky whimpering sound and covered his face. “Yes,” I
said. “It's a terrible mess, isn't it?”

He used his whole face to close his eyes. He could not look, not now,
not like this. I did not blame him, not really, it /was/ a terrible
mess. It had bothered me just to know it was there since I had set it up
for him. But he had to see it. He had to. Not just for me. Not just for
the Dark Passenger. For /him/. He had to see. And he was not looking.

“Open your eyes, Father Donovan,” I said.

“Please,” he said in a terrible little whimper. It got on my nerves very
badly, shouldn't have, icy-clean control, but it got to me, whining in
the face of that mess on the floor, and I kicked his legs out from under
him. I hauled hard on the noose and grabbed the back of his neck with my
right hand, then slammed his face into the filthy warped floorboards.
There was a little blood and that made me madder.

“Open them,” I said. “Open your eyes. Open them NOW. /Look/.” I grabbed
his hair and pulled his head back. “Do as you're told,” I said. “Look.
Or I will cut your eyelids right off your face.”

I was very convincing. And so he did it. He did as he was told. He looked.

I had worked hard to make it right, but you have to use what you've got
to work with. I could not have done it at all if they had not been there
long enough for everything to dry up, but they were so very dirty. I had
managed to clean off most of the dirt, but some of the bodies had been
in the garden a very long time and you couldn't tell where the dirt
began and the body stopped. You never could tell, really, when you stop
to think about it. So dirty—

There were seven of them, seven small bodies, seven extra-dirty orphan
children laid out on rubber shower sheets, which are neater and don't
leak. Seven straight lines pointing straight across the room.

Pointing right at Father Donovan. So he knew.

He was about to join them.

“Hail Mary, full of grace—” he started. I jerked hard on the noose.

“None of that, Father. Not now. Now is for real truth.”

“Please,” he choked.

“Yes, beg me. That's good. Much better.” I yanked again. “Do you think
that's it, Father? Seven bodies? Did they beg?” He had nothing to say.
“Do you think that's all of them, Father? Just seven? Did I get them all?”

“Oh, God,” he rasped out, with a pain that was good to hear.

“And what about the other towns, Father? What about Fayetteville? Would
you like to talk about Fayetteville?” He just choked out a sob, no
words. “And what about East Orange? Was that three? Or did I miss one
there? It's so hard to be sure. Was it four in East Orange, Father?”

Father Donovan tried to scream. There was not enough left of his throat
for it to be a very good scream, but it had real feeling behind it,
which made up for the poor technique. Then he fell forward onto his face
and I let him snivel for a while before I pulled him up and onto his
feet. He was not steady, and not in control. His bladder had let loose
and there was drool on his chin.

“Please,” he said. “I couldn't help myself. I just couldn't help myself.
Please, you have to understand—”

“I do understand, Father,” I said, and there was something in my voice,
the Dark Passenger's voice now, and the sound of it froze him. He lifted
his head slowly to face me and what he saw in my eyes made him very
still. “I understand perfectly,” I told him, moving very close to his
face. The sweat on his cheeks turned to ice. “You see,” I said, “I can't
help myself, either.”

We were very close now, almost touching, and the dirtiness of him was
suddenly too much. I jerked up on the noose and kicked his feet out from
under him again. Father Donovan sprawled on the floor.

“But /children/?” I said. “I could never do this to children.” I put my
hard clean boot on the back of his head and slammed his face down. “Not
like you, Father. Never kids. I have to find people like you.”

“What are you?” Father Donovan whispered.

“The beginning,” I said. “And the end. Meet your Unmaker, Father.” I had
the needle ready and it went into his neck like it was supposed to,
slight resistance from the rigid muscles, but none from the priest. I
pushed the plunger and the syringe emptied, filling Father Donovan with
quick, clean calm. Moments, only moments, and his head began to float,
and he rolled his face to me.

Did he truly see me now? Did he see the double rubber gloves, the
careful coveralls, the slick silk mask? Did he really see me? Or did
that only happen in the other room, the Dark Passenger's room, the Clean
Room? Painted white two nights past and swept, scrubbed, sprayed,
cleaned as clean as can be. And in the middle of the room, its windows
sealed with thick white rubberized sheets, under the lights in the
middle of the room, did he finally see me there in the table I had made,
the boxes of white garbage bags, the bottles of chemicals, and the small
row of saws and knives? Did he see me at last?

Or did he see those seven untidy lumps, and who knows how many more? Did
he see himself at last, unable to scream, turning into that kind of mess
in the garden?

He would not, of course. His imagination did not allow him to see
himself as the same species. And in a way, he was right. He would never
turn into the kind of mess he had made of the children. I would never do
that, could never allow that. I am not like Father Donovan, not that
kind of monster.

I am a very neat monster.

Neatness takes time, of course, but it's worth it. Worth it to make the
Dark Passenger happy, keep him quiet for another long while. Worth it
just to do it right and tidy. Remove one more heap of mess from the
world. A few more neatly wrapped bags of garbage and my one small corner
of the world is a neater, happier place. A better place.

I had about eight hours before I had to be gone. I would need them all
to do it right.

I secured the priest to the table with duct tape and cut away his
clothes. I did the preliminary work quickly; shaving, scrubbing, cutting
away the things that stuck out untidily. As always I felt the wonderful
long slow build to release begin its pounding throughout my entire body.
It would flutter through me while I worked, rising and taking me with
it, until the very end, the Need and the priest swimming away together
on a fading tide.

And just before I started the serious work Father Donovan opened his
eyes and looked at me. There was no fear now; that happens sometimes. He
looked straight up at me and his mouth moved.

“What?” I said. I moved my head a little closer. “I can't hear you.”

I heard him breathe, a slow and peaceful breath, and then he said it
again before his eyes closed.

“You're welcome,” I said, and I went to work.

CHAPTER 2

BY FOUR-THIRTY IN THE MORNING THE PRIEST WAS all cleaned up. I felt a
lot better. I always did, after. Killing makes me feel good. It works
the knots out of darling Dexter's dark schemata. It's a sweet release, a
necessary letting go of all the little hydraulic valves inside. I enjoy
my work; sorry if that bothers you. Oh, very sorry, really. But there it
is. And it's not just any killing, of course. It has to be done the
right way, at the right time, with the right partner—very complicated,
but very necessary.

And always somewhat draining. So I was tired, but the tension of the
last week was gone, the cold voice of the Dark Passenger was quiet, and
I could be me again. Quirky, funny, happy-go-lucky, dead-inside Dexter.
No longer Dexter with the knife, Dexter the Avenger. Not until next time.

I put all the bodies back in the garden with one new neighbor and tidied
the little falling-down house as much as I could. I packed my things
into the priest's car and drove south to the small side canal where I
had left my boat, a seventeen-foot Whaler with a shallow draft and a big
engine. I pushed the priest's car into the canal behind my boat and
climbed on board. I watched the car settle and disappear. Then I cranked
up my outboard and eased out of the canal, heading north across the bay.
The sun was just coming up and bouncing off the brightwork. I put on my
very best happy face; just another early-morning fisherman heading home.
Red snapper, anyone?

By six-thirty I was home in my Coconut Grove apartment. I took the slide
from my pocket, a simple, clean glass strip—with a careful single drop
of the priest's blood preserved in the center. Nice and clean, dry now,
ready to slip under my microscope when I wanted to remember. I put the
slide with the others, thirty-six neat and careful very dry drops of blood.

I took an extra-long shower, letting the hot hot water wash away the
last of the tension and ease the knots in my muscles, scrubbing off the
small final traces of clinging smell from the priest and the garden of
the little house in the swamp.

/Children. I should have killed him twice./

Whatever made me the way I am left me hollow, empty inside, unable to
feel. It doesn't seem like a big deal. I'm quite sure most people fake
an awful lot of everyday human contact. I just fake all of it. I fake it
very well, and the feelings are never there. But I like kids. I could
never have them, since the idea of sex is no idea at all. Imagine doing
those things— How can you? Where's your sense of dignity? But kids—kids
are special. Father Donovan deserved to die. The Code of Harry was
satisfied, along with the Dark Passenger.

By seven-fifteen I felt clean again. I had coffee, cereal, and headed in
for work.

The building where I work is a large modern thing, white with lots of
glass, near the airport. My lab is on the second floor, in the back. I
have a small office attached to the lab. It is not much of an office,
but it's mine, a cubicle off the main blood lab. All mine, nobody else
allowed in, nobody to share with, to mess up my area. A desk with a
chair, another chair for a visitor, if he's not too big. Computer,
shelf, filing cabinet. Telephone. Answering machine.

Answering machine with a blinking light as I came in. A message for me
is not a daily thing. For some reason, there are very few people in the
world who can think of things to say to a blood spatter pattern analyst
during working hours. One of the few people who does have things to say
to me is Deborah Morgan, my foster sister. A cop, just like her father.

The message was from her.

I punched the button and heard tinny /Tejano/ music, then Deborah's
voice. “Dexter, please, as soon as you get in. I'm at a crime scene out
on Tamiami Trail, at the Cacique Motel.” There was a pause. I heard her
put a hand over the mouthpiece of the telephone and say something to
somebody. Then there was a blast of Mexican music again and she was back
on. “Can you get out here right away? Please, Dex?”

She hung up.

I don't have a family. I mean, as far as I know. Somewhere out there
must be people who carry similar genetic material, I'm sure. I pity
them. But I've never met them. I haven't tried, and they haven't tried
to find me. I was adopted, raised by Harry and Doris Morgan, Deborah's
parents. And considering what I am, they did a wonderful job of raising
me, don't you think?

Both dead now. And so Deb is the only person in the world who gives a
rusty possum fart whether I live or die. For some reason that I can't
fathom, she actually prefers me to be alive. I think that's nice, and if
I could have feelings at all I would have them for Deb.

So I went. I drove out of the Metro-Dade parking lot and got onto the
nearby Turnpike, which took me south to the section of Tamiami Trail
that is home to the Cacique Motel and several hundred of its brothers
and sisters. In its own way, it is paradise. Particularly if you are a
cockroach. Rows of buildings that manage to glitter and molder at the
same time. Bright neon over ancient, squalid, sponge-rotted structures.
If you don't go at night, you won't go. Because to see these places by
daylight is to see the bottom line of our flimsy contract with life.

Every major city has a section like this one. If a piebald dwarf with
advanced leprosy wants to have sex with a kangaroo and a teenage choir,
he'll find his way here and get a room. When he's done, he might take
the whole gang next door for a cup of Cuban coffee and a /medianoche/
sandwich. Nobody would care, as long as he tipped.

Deborah had been spending way too much time out here lately. Her
opinion, not mine. It seemed like a good place to go if you were a cop
and you wanted to increase your statistical chance of catching somebody
doing something awful.

Deborah didn't see it that way. Maybe because she was working vice. A
good-looking young woman working vice on the Tamiami Trail usually ends
up as bait on a sting, standing outside almost naked to catch men who
wanted to pay for sex. Deborah hated that. Couldn't get worked up about
prostitution, except as a sociological issue. Didn't think bagging johns
was real crime fighting. And, known only to me, she hated anything that
overemphasized her femininity and her lush figure. She wanted to be a
cop; it was not her fault she looked more like a centerfold.

And as I pulled into the parking lot that linked the Cacique and its
neighbor, Tito's Café Cubano, I could see that she was currently
emphasizing the hell out of her figure. She was dressed in a neon-pink
tube top, spandex shorts, black fishnet stockings, and spike heels.
Straight from the costume shop for Hollywood Hookers in 3-D.

A few years back somebody in the Vice Bureau got the word that the pimps
were laughing at them on the streets. It seems the vice cops, mostly
male, were picking the outfits for the women operatives who worked in
the sting operations. Their choice of clothing was showing an awful lot
about their preferences in kinkiness, but it did not look much like
hooker wear. So everybody on the street could tell when the new girl was
carrying a badge and gun in her clutch purse.

As a result of this tip, the vice cops began to insist that the girls
who went undercover pick their own outfits for the job. After all, girls
know more about what looks right, don't they?

Maybe most of them do. Deborah doesn't. She's never felt comfortable in
anything but blues. You should have seen what she wanted to wear to her
prom. And now—I had never seen a beautiful woman dressed in such a
revealing costume who looked less sexually appealing than Deb did.

But she did stand out. She was working crowd control, her badge pinned
to the tube top. She was more visible than the half mile of yellow
crime-scene tape that was already strung up, more than the three patrol
cars angled in with their lights flashing. The pink tube top flashed a
little brighter.

She was off to one side of the parking lot, keeping a growing crowd back
from the lab techs who appeared to be going through the Dumpster
belonging to the coffee shop. I was glad I hadn't been assigned to that.
The stink of it came all the way across the lot and in my car window—a
dark stench of Latin coffee grounds mixed with old fruit and rancid pork.

The cop at the entrance to the parking lot was a guy I knew. He waved me
in and I found a spot.

“Deb,” I said as I strolled over. “Nice outfit. Really shows your figure
to full advantage.”

“Fuck off,” she said, and she blushed. Really something to see in a
full-grown cop.

“They found another hooker,” she said. “At least, they think it's a
hooker. Hard to tell from what's left.”

“That's the third in the last five months,” I said.

“Fifth,” she told me. “There were two more up in Broward.” She shook her
head. “These assholes keep saying that officially there's no connection.”

“It would make for an awful lot of paperwork,” I said helpfully.

Deb showed me her teeth. “How about some basic fucking police work?” she
snarled. “A moron could see these kills are connected.” And she gave a
little shudder.

I stared at her, amazed. She was a cop, daughter of a cop. Things didn't
bother her. When she'd been a rookie cop and the older guys played
tricks on Deborah—showing her the hacked-up bodies that turn up in Miami
every day—to get her to blow her lunch, she hadn't blinked. She'd seen
it all. Been there, done that, bought the T-shirt.

But this one made her shudder.

/Interesting/.

“This one is special, is that it?” I asked her.

“This one is on my beat, with the hookers.” She pointed a finger at me.
“And THAT means I've got a shot to get in on it, get noticed, and pull a
transfer into Homicide Bureau.”

I gave her my happy smile. “Ambition, Deborah?”

“Goddamned right,” she said. “I want out of vice, and I want out of this
sex suit. I want into Homicide, Dexter, and this could be my ticket.
With one small break—” She paused. And then she said something
absolutely amazing. “Please help me, Dex,” she said. “I really hate this.”

“Please, Deborah? You're saying /please/ to me? Do you know how nervous
that makes me?”

“Cut the crap, Dex.”

“But Deborah, really—”

“Cut it, I said. Will you help me or not?”

When she put it that way, with that strange rare “please” dangling in
the air, what else could I say but, “Of course I will, Deb. You know that.”

And she eyed me hard, taking back her please. “I /don't/ know it, Dex. I
don't know anything with you.”

“Of course I'll help, Deb,” I repeated, trying to sound hurt. And doing
a really good imitation of injured dignity, I headed for the Dumpster
with the rest of the lab rats.

Camilla Figg was crawling through the garbage, dusting for fingerprints.
She was a stocky woman of thirty-five with short hair who had never
seemed to respond to my breezy, charming pleasantries. But as she saw
me, she came up onto her knees, blushed, and watched me go by without
speaking. She always seemed to stare at me and then blush.

Sitting on an overturned plastic milk carton on the far end of the
Dumpster, poking through a handful of waste matter, was Vince Masuoka.
He was half Japanese and liked to joke that he got the short half. He
called it a joke, anyway.

There was something just slightly off in Vince's bright, Asian smile.
Like he had learned to smile from a picture book. Even when he made the
required dirty put-down jokes with the cops, nobody got mad at him.
Nobody laughed, either, but that didn't stop him. He kept making all the
correct ritual gestures, but he always seemed to be faking. That's why I
liked him, I think. Another guy pretending to be human, just like me.

“Well, Dexter,” Vince said without looking up. “What brings you here?”

“I came to see how real experts operate in a totally professional
atmosphere,” I said. “Have you seen any?”

“Ha-ha,” he said. It was supposed to be a laugh, but it was even phonier
than his smile. “You must think you're in Boston.” He found something
and held it up to the light, squinting. “Seriously, why are you here?”

“Why wouldn't I be here, Vince?” I said, pretending to sound indignant.
“It's a crime scene, isn't it?”

“You do blood spatter,” he said, throwing away whatever he'd been
staring at and searching for another one.

“I knew that.”

He looked at me with his biggest fake smile. “There's no blood here, Dex.”

I felt light-headed. “What does that mean?”

“There's no blood in or on or near, Dex. No blood at all. Weirdest thing
you ever saw,” he said.

No blood at all. I could hear that phrase repeat itself in my head,
louder each time. No sticky, hot, messy, awful blood. No splatter. No
stain. NO BLOOD AT ALL.

Why hadn't I thought of that?

It felt like a missing piece to something I didn't know was incomplete.

I don't pretend to understand what it is about Dexter and blood. Just
thinking of it sets my teeth on edge—and yet I have, after all, made it
my career, my study, and part of my real work. Clearly some very deep
things are going on, but I find it a little hard to stay interested. I
am what I am, and isn't it a lovely night to dissect a child killer?

But this—

“Are you all right, Dexter?” Vince asked.

“I am fantastic,” I said. “How does he do it?”

“That depends.”

I looked at Vince. He was staring at a handful of coffee grounds,
carefully pushing them around with one rubber-gloved finger. “Depends on
what, Vince?”

“On who /he/ is and what /it/ he's doing,” he said. “Ha-ha.”

I shook my head. “Sometimes you work too hard at being inscrutable,” I
said. “How does the killer get rid of the blood?”

“Hard to say right now,” he said. “We haven't found any of it. And the
body is not in real good shape, so it's going to be hard to find much.”

That didn't sound nearly as interesting. I like to leave a neat body. No
fuss, no mess, no dripping blood. If the killer was just another dog
tearing at a bone, this was all nothing to me.

I breathed a little easier. “Where's the body?” I asked Vince.

He jerked his head at a spot twenty feet away. “Over there,” he said.
“With LaGuerta.”

“Oh, my,” I said. “Is LaGuerta handling this?”

He gave me his fake smile again. “Lucky killer.”

I looked. A small knot of people stood around a cluster of tidy trash
bags. “I don't see it,” I said.

“Right there. The trash bags. Each one is a body part. He cut the victim
into pieces and then wrapped up each one like it was a Christmas
present. Did you ever see anything like that before?”

Of course I had.

That's how I do it.

CHAPTER 3

THERE IS SOMETHING STRANGE AND DISARMING about looking at a homicide
scene in the bright daylight of the Miami sun. It makes the most
grotesque killings look antiseptic, staged. Like you're in a new and
daring section of Disney World. Dahmer Land. Come ride the refrigerator.
Please hurl your lunch in the designated containers only.

Not that the sight of mutilated bodies anywhere has ever bothered /me/,
oh no, far from it. I do resent the messy ones a little when they are
careless with their body fluids—nasty stuff. Other than that, it seems
no worse than looking at spare ribs at the grocery store. But rookies
and visitors to crime scenes tend to throw up—and for some reason, they
throw up much less here than they do up North. The sun just takes the
sting out. It cleans things up, makes them neater. Maybe that's why I
love Miami. It's such a /neat/ town.

And it was already a beautiful, hot Miami day. Anyone who had worn a
suit coat was now looking for a place to hang it. Alas, there was no
such place in the grubby little parking lot. There were only five or six
cars and the Dumpster. It was shoved over in a corner, next to the café,
backed up against a pink stucco wall topped with barbed wire. The back
door to the café was there. A sullen young woman moved in and out, doing
a brisk business in /café cubano/ and /pasteles/ with the cops and the
technicians on the scene. The handful of assorted cops in suits who hang
out at homicide scenes, either to be noticed, to apply pressure, or to
make sure they know what's going on, now had one more thing to juggle.
Coffee, a pastry, a suit coat.

The crime-lab gang didn't wear suits. Rayon bowling shirts with two
pockets was more their speed. I was wearing one myself. It repeated a
pattern of voodoo drummers and palm trees against a lime green
background. Stylish, but practical.

I headed for the closest rayon shirt in the knot of people around the
body. It belonged to Angel Batista-no-relation, as he usually introduced
himself. Hi, I'm Angel Batista, no relation. He worked in the medical
examiner's office. At the moment he was squatting beside one of the
garbage bags and peering inside it.

I joined him. I was anxious to see inside the bag myself. Anything that
got a reaction from Deborah was worth a peek.

“Angel,” I said, coming up on his side. “What do we have?”

“What you mean /we/, white boy?” he said. “We got no blood with this
one. You're out of a job.”

“I heard.” I crouched down beside him. “Was it done here, or just dumped?”

He shook his head. “Hard to say. They empty the Dumpster twice a
week—this has been here for maybe two days.”

I looked around the parking lot, then over at the moldy façade of the
Cacique. “What about the motel?”

Angel shrugged. “They're still checking, but I don't think they'll find
anything. The other times, he just used a handy Dumpster. Huh,” he said
suddenly.

“What?”

He used a pencil to peel back the plastic bag. “Look at that cut.”

The end of a disjointed leg stuck out, looking pale and exceptionally
dead in the glare of the sun. This piece ended in the ankle, foot neatly
lopped off. A small tattoo of a butterfly remained, one wing cut away
with the foot.

I whistled. It was almost surgical. This guy did very nice work—as good
as I could do. “Very clean,” I said. And it was, even beyond the
neatness of the cutting. I had never seen such clean, dry,
/neat/-looking dead flesh. Wonderful.

“Me cago en diez on nice and clean,” he said. “It's not finished.”

I looked past him, staring a little deeper into the bag. Nothing moving
in there. “It looks pretty final to me, Angel.”

“Lookit,” he said. He flipped open one of the other bags. “This leg, he
cuts it in four pieces. Almost like with a ruler or something, huh? And
so /this/ one,” and he pointed back to the first ankle that I had
admired so deeply, “this one he cuts in two pieces only? How's come, huh?”

“I'm sure I don't know,” I said. “Perhaps Detective LaGuerta will figure
it out.”

Angel looked at me for a moment and we both struggled to keep a straight
face. “Perhaps she will,” he said, and he turned back to his work. “Why
don't you go ask her?”

“Hasta luego, Angel,” I said.

“Almost certainly,” he answered, head down over the plastic bag.

There was a rumor going around a few years back that Detective Migdia
LaGuerta got into the Homicide Bureau by sleeping with somebody. To look
at her once you might buy into that. She has all the necessary parts in
the right places to be physically attractive in a sullen, aristocratic
way. A true artist with her makeup and very well dressed, Bloomingdale's
chic. But the rumor can't be true. To begin with, although she seems
outwardly very feminine, I've never met a woman who was more masculine
inside. She was hard, ambitious in the most self-serving way, and her
only weakness seemed to be for model-handsome men a few years younger
than she was. So I'm quite sure she didn't get into Homicide using sex.
She got into Homicide because she's Cuban, plays politics, and knows how
to kiss ass. That combination is far better than sex in Miami.

LaGuerta is very very good at kissing ass, a world-class ass kisser. She
kissed ass all the way up to the lofty rank of homicide investigator.
Unfortunately, it's a job where her skills at posterior smooching were
never called for, and she was a terrible detective.

It happens; incompetence is rewarded more often than not. I have to work
with her anyway. So I have used my considerable charm to make her like
me. Easier than you might think. Anybody can be charming if they don't
mind faking it, saying all the stupid, obvious, nauseating things that a
conscience keeps most people from saying. Happily, I don't have a
conscience. I say them.

As I approached the little group clustered near the café, LaGuerta was
interviewing somebody in rapid-fire Spanish. I speak Spanish; I even
understand a little Cuban. But I could only get one word in ten from
LaGuerta. The Cuban dialect is the despair of the Spanish-speaking
world. The whole purpose of Cuban Spanish seems to be to race against an
invisible stopwatch and get out as much as possible in three-second
bursts without using any consonants.

The trick to following it is to know what the person is going to say
before they say it. That tends to contribute to the clannishness
non-Cubans sometimes complain about.

The man LaGuerta was grilling was short and broad, dark, with Indio
features, and was clearly intimidated by the dialect, the tone, and the
badge. He tried not to look at her as he spoke, which seemed to make her
speak even faster.

“No, no hay nadie afuera,” he said softly, slowly, looking away. “Todos
estan en café.” /Nobody was outside, they were all in the café/.

“Donde estabas?” she demanded. /Where were you?/

The man looked at the bags of body parts and quickly looked away.
“Cocina.” /The kitchen/. “Entonces yo saco la basura.” /Then I took out
the garbage./

LaGuerta went on; pushing at him verbally, asking the wrong questions in
a tone of voice that bullied and demeaned him until he slowly forgot the
horror of finding the body parts in the Dumpster, and turned sullen and
uncooperative instead.

A true master's touch. Take the key witness and turn him against you. If
you can screw up the case in the first few vital hours, it saves time
and paperwork later.

She finished with a few threats and sent the man away. “Indio,” she
spat, as he lumbered out of earshot.

“It takes all kinds, Detective,” I said. “Even campesinos.” She looked
up and ran her eyes over me, slowly, while I stood and wondered why. Had
she forgotten what I looked like? But she finished with a big smile. She
really did like me, the idiot.

“Hola, Dexter. What brings you here?”

“I heard you were here and couldn't stay away. Please, Detective, when
will you marry me?”

She giggled. The other officers within earshot exchanged a glance and
then looked away. “I don't buy a shoe until I try it on,” LaGuerta said.
“No matter how good the shoe looks.” And while I was sure that was true,
it didn't actually explain to me why she stared at me with her tongue
between her teeth as she said it. “Now go away, you distracting me. I
have serious work here.”

“I can see that,” I said. “Have you caught the killer yet?”

She snorted. “You sound like a reporter. Those assholes will be all over
me in another hour.”

“What will you tell them?”

She looked at the bags of body parts and frowned. Not because the sight
bothered her. She was seeing her career, trying to phrase her statement
to the press.

“It is only a matter of time before the killer makes a mistake and we
catch him—”

“Meaning,” I said, “that so far he hasn't made any mistakes, you don't
have any clues, and you have to wait for him to kill again before you
can do anything?”

She looked at me hard. “I forget. Why do I like you?”

I just shrugged. I didn't have a clue—but then, apparently she didn't
either.

“What we got is nada y nada. That Guatemalan,” she made a face at the
retreating Indio, “he found the body when he came out with the garbage
from the restaurant. He didn't recognize these garbage bags and he
opened one up to see if maybe there was something good. And it was the
head.”

“Peekaboo,” I said softly.

“Hah?”

“Nothing.”

She looked around, frowning, perhaps hoping a clue would leap out and
she could shoot it.

“So that's it. Nobody saw anything, heard anything. Nothing. I have to
wait for your fellow nerds to finish up before I know anything.”

“Detective,” said a voice behind us. Captain Matthews strolled up in a
cloud of Aramis aftershave, meaning that the reporters would be here
very shortly.

“Hello, Captain,” LaGuerta said.

“I've asked Officer Morgan to maintain a peripheral involvement in this
case,” he said. LaGuerta flinched. “In her capacity as an undercover
operative she has resources in the prostitution community that could
assist us in expediting the solution.” The man talked with a thesaurus.
Too many years of writing reports.

“Captain, I'm not sure that's necessary,” LaGuerta said.

He winked and put a hand on her shoulder. People management is a skill.
“Relax, Detective. She's not going to interfere with your command
prerogatives. She'll just check in with you if she has something to
report. Witnesses, that sort of thing. Her father was a damn good cop.
All right?” His eyes glazed and refocused on something on the other end
of the parking lot. I looked. The Channel 7 News van was rolling in.
“Excuse me,” Matthews said. He straightened his tie, put on a serious
expression, and strolled over toward the van.

“Puta,” LaGuerta said under her breath.

I didn't know if she meant that as a general observation, or was talking
about Deb, but I thought it was a good time to slip away, too, before
LaGuerta remembered that Officer Puta was my sister.

As I rejoined Deb, Matthews was shaking hands with Jerry Gonzalez from
Channel 7. Jerry was the Miami area's leading champion of
if-it-bleeds-it-leads journalism. My kind of guy. He was going to be
disappointed this time.

I felt a slight quiver pass over my skin. /No blood at all/.

“Dexter,” Deborah said, still trying to sound like a cop, but I could
tell she was excited. “I talked to Captain Matthews. He's going to let
me in on this.”

“I heard,” I said. “Be careful.”

She blinked at me. “What are you talking about?”

“LaGuerta,” I said.

Deborah snorted. “Her,” she said.

“Yeah. Her. She doesn't like you, and she doesn't want you on her turf.”

“Tough. She got her orders from the captain.”

“Uh-huh. And she's already spent five minutes figuring out how to get
around them. So watch your back, Debs.”

She just shrugged. “What did you find out?” she asked.

I shook my head. “Nothing yet. LaGuerta's already nowhere. But Vince
said—” I stopped. Even talking about it seemed too private.

“Vince said what?”

“A small thing, Deb. A detail. Who knows what it means?”

“Nobody will ever know if you don't say it, Dexter.”

“There . . . seems to be no blood left with the body. No blood at all.”

Deborah was quiet for a minute, thinking. Not a reverent pause, not like
me. Just thinking. “Okay,” she said at last. “I give up. What does it mean?”

“Too soon to tell,” I said.

“But you think it means something.”

It meant a strange light-headedness. It meant an itch to find out more
about this killer. It meant an appreciative chuckle from the Dark
Passenger, who should have been quiet so soon after the priest. But that
was all rather tough to explain to Deborah, wasn't it? So I just said,
“It might, Deb. Who really knows?”

She looked at me hard for half a moment, then shrugged. “All right,” she
said. “Anything else?”

“Oh, a great deal,” I said. “Very nice blade work. The cuts are close to
surgical. Unless they find something in the hotel, which no one expects,
the body was killed somewhere else and dumped here.”

“Where?”

“Very good question. Half of police work is asking the right questions.”

“The other half is answering,” she told me.

“Well then. Nobody knows where yet, Deb. And I certainly don't have all
the forensic data—”

“But you're starting to get a feel for this one,” she said.

I looked at her. She looked back. I had developed hunches before. I had
a small reputation for it. My hunches were often quite good. And why
shouldn't they be? I often know how the killers are thinking. I think
the same way. Of course I was not always right. Sometimes I was very
wide of the mark. It wouldn't look good if I was always right. And I
didn't want the cops to catch /every/ serial killer out there. Then what
would I do for a hobby? But this one—Which way should I go with this so
very interesting escapade?

“Tell me, Dexter,” Deborah urged. “Have you got any guesses about this?”

“Possibly,” I said. “It's a little early yet.”

“Well, Morgan,” said LaGuerta from behind us. We both turned. “I see
you're dressed for real police work.”

Something about LaGuerta's tone was like a slap on the face. Deborah
stiffened. “Detective,” she said. “Did you find anything?” She said it
in a tone that already knew the answer.

A cheap shot. But it missed. LaGuerta waved a hand airily. “They are
only putas,” she said, looking hard at Deb's cleavage, so very prominent
in her hooker suit. “Just hookers. The important thing here is to keep
the press from getting hysterical.” She shook her head slowly, as if in
disbelief, and looked up. “Considering what you can do with gravity,
that should be easy.” And she winked at me and strolled off, over toward
the perimeter, where Captain Matthews was talking with great dignity to
Jerry Gonzalez from Channel 7.

“Bitch,” Deborah said.

“I'm sorry, Debs. Would you prefer me to say, /We'll show her/? Or
should I go with /I told you so/?”

She glared at me. “Goddamn it, Dexter,” she said. “I really want to be
the one to find this guy.”

And as I thought about that /no blood at all/—

So did I. I really wanted to find him, too.

CHAPTER 4

I TOOK MY BOAT OUT THAT NIGHT AFTER WORK, TO get away from Deb's
questions and to sort through what I was feeling. /Feeling/. Me,
feeling. What a concept.

I nosed my Whaler slowly out the canal, thinking nothing, a perfect Zen
state, moving at idle speed past the large houses, all separated from
each other by high hedges and chain-link fences. I threw an automatic
big wave and bright smile to all the neighbors out in their yards that
grew neatly up to the canal's seawall. Kids playing on the manicured
grass. Mom and Dad barbecuing, or lounging, or polishing the barbed
wire, hawkeyes on the kids. I waved to everybody. Some of them even
waved back. They knew me, had seen me go by before, always cheerful, a
big hello for everybody. /He was such a nice man. Very friendly. I can't
believe he did those horrible things/ . . .

I opened up the throttle when I cleared the canal, heading out the
channel and then southeast, toward Cape Florida. The wind in my face and
the taste of the salt spray helped clear my head, made me feel clean and
a little fresher. I found it a great deal easier to think. Part of it
was the calm and peace of the water. And another part was that in the
best tradition of Miami watercraft, most of the other boaters seemed to
be trying to kill me. I found that very relaxing. I was right at home.
This is my country; these are my people.

All day long at work I'd gotten little forensic updates. Around
lunchtime the story broke national. The lid was coming off the hooker
murders after the “grisly discovery” at the Cacique Motel. Channel 7 had
done a masterful job of presenting all the hysterical horror of body
parts in a Dumpster without actually saying anything about them. As
Detective LaGuerta had shrewdly observed, these were only hookers; but
once public pressure started to rise from the media, they might as well
be senator's daughters. And so the department began to gear up for a
long spell of defensive maneuvering, knowing exactly what kind of
heartrending twaddle would be coming from the brave and fearless foot
soldiers of the fifth estate.

Deb had stayed at the scene until the captain began to worry about
authorizing too much overtime, and then she'd been sent home. She
started calling me at two in the afternoon to hear what I'd discovered,
which was very little. They'd found no traces of anything at the motel.
There were so many tire tracks in the parking lot that none were
distinct. No prints or traces in the Dumpster, on the bags, or on the
body parts. Everything USDA inspection clean.

The one big clue of the day was the left leg. As Angel had noticed, the
right leg had been sectioned into several neat pieces, cut at the hip,
knee, and ankle. But the left leg was not. It was a mere two sections,
neatly wrapped. Aha, said Detective LaGuerta, lady genius. Somebody had
interrupted the killer, surprised him, startled him so he did not finish
the cut. He panicked when he was seen. And she directed all her effort
at finding that witness.

There was one small problem with LaGuerta's theory of interruption. A
tiny little thing, perhaps splitting hairs, but—the entire body had
still been meticulously cleaned and wrapped, presumably after it had
been cut up. And then it had been transported carefully to the Dumpster,
apparently with enough time and focus for the killer to make no mistakes
and leave no traces. Either nobody pointed this out to LaGuerta
or—wonder of wonders!—could it be that nobody else had noticed?
Possible; so much of police work is routine, fitting details into
patterns. And if the pattern was brand new, the investigation could seem
like three blind men examining an elephant with a microscope.

But since I was neither blind nor hampered by routine, it had seemed far
more likely to me that the killer was simply unsatisfied. Plenty of time
to work, but—this was the fifth murder in the same pattern. Was it
getting boring, simply chopping up the body? Was Our Boy searching for
something else, something different? Some new direction, an untried twist?

I could almost feel his frustration. To have come so far, all the way to
the end, sectioning the leftovers for gift wrapping. And then the sudden
realization: /This isn't it. Something is just not right/. Coitus
interruptus.

It wasn't fulfilling him this way anymore. He needed a different
approach. He was trying to express something, and hadn't found his
vocabulary yet. And in my personal opinion—I mean, if it was /me/—this
would make him very frustrated. And very likely to look further for the
answer.

Soon.

But let LaGuerta look for a witness. There would be none. This was a
cold, careful monster, and absolutely fascinating to me. And what should
I do about that fascination? I was not sure, so I had retreated to my
boat to think.

A Donzi cut across my bow at seventy miles per hour, only inches away. I
waved happily and returned to the present. I was approaching
Stiltsville, the mostly abandoned collection of old stilt homes in the
water near Cape Florida. I nosed into a big circle, going nowhere, and
let my thoughts move back into that same slow arc.

What would I do? I needed to decide now, before I got too helpful for
Deborah. I could help her solve this, absolutely, no one better. Nobody
else was even moving in the right direction. But did I want to help? Did
I want this killer arrested? Or did I want to find him and stop him
myself? Beyond this—oh, nagging little thought—did I even want him to stop?

What would I do?

To my right I could just see Elliott Key in the last light of the day.
And as always, I remembered my camping trip there with Harry Morgan. My
foster father. The Good Cop.

/You're different, Dexter/.

Yes, Harry, I certainly am.

/But you can learn to control that difference and use it constructively./

All right, Harry. If you think I should. How?

And he told me.

 

There is no starry sky anywhere like the starry sky in South Florida
when you are fourteen and camping out with Dad. Even if he's only your
foster dad. And even if the sight of all those stars merely fills you
with a kind of satisfaction, emotion being out of the question. You
don't feel it. That's part of the reason you're here.

The fire has died down and the stars are exceedingly bright and foster
dear old dad has been quiet for some time, taking small sips on the
old-fashioned hip flask he has pulled from the outside flap of his pack.
And he's not very good at this, not like so many other cops, not really
a drinker. But it's empty now, and it's time for him to say his piece if
he's ever going to say it.

“You're different, Dexter,” he says.

I look away from the brightness of the stars. Around the small and sandy
clearing the last glow of the fire is making shadows. Some of them
trickle across Harry's face. He looks strange to me, like I've never
seen him before. Determined, unhappy, a little dazed. “What do you mean,
Dad?”

He won't look at me. “The Billups say Buddy has disappeared,” he says.

“Noisy little creep. He was barking all night. Mom couldn't sleep.”

Mom needed her sleep, of course. Dying of cancer requires plenty of
rest, and she wasn't getting it with that awful little dog across the
street yapping at every leaf that blew down the sidewalk.

“I found the grave,” Harry says. “There were a lot of bones in there,
Dexter. Not just Buddy's.”

There's very little to say here. I carefully pull at a handful of pine
needles and wait for Harry.

“How long have you been doing this?”

I search Harry's face, then look out across the clearing to the beach.
Our boat is there, moving gently with the surge of the water. The lights
of Miami are off to the right, a soft white glow. I can't figure out
where Harry is going, what he wants to hear. But he is my straight-arrow
foster dad; the truth is usually a good idea with Harry. He always
knows, or he finds out.

“A year and a half,” I say.

Harry nods. “Why did you start?”

A very good question, and certainly beyond me at fourteen. “It just—I
kind of . . . had to,” I tell him. Even then, so young but so smooth.

“Do you hear a voice?” he wants to know. “Something or somebody telling
you what to do, and you had to do it?”

“Uh,” I say with fourteen-year-old eloquence, “not exactly.”

“Tell me,” Harry says.

Oh for a moon, a good fat moon, something bigger to look at. I clutch
another fistful of pine needles. My face is hot, as if Dad has asked me
to talk about sex dreams. Which, in a way— “It, uh . . . I kind of, you
know, /feel/ something,” I say. “Inside. Watching me. Maybe, um.
Laughing? But not really a voice, just—” An eloquent teenaged shrug. But
it seems to make sense to Harry.

“And this /something/. It makes you kill things.”

High overhead a slow fat jet crawls by. “Not, um, doesn't /make/ me,” I
say. “Just—makes it seem like a good idea?”

“Have you ever wanted to kill something else? Something bigger than a dog?”

I try to answer but there is something in my throat. I clear it. “Yes,”
I say.

“A person?”

“Nobody in particular, Dad. Just—” I shrug again.

“Why didn't you?”

“It's—I thought you wouldn't like it. You and Mom.”

“That's all that stopped you?”

“I, uh—I didn't want you, um, mad at me. Uh . . . you know. Disappointed.”

I steal a glance at Harry. He is looking at me, not blinking. “Is that
why we took this trip, Dad? To talk about this?”

“Yes,” Harry says. “We need to get you squared away.”

Squared away, oh yes, a completely Harry idea of how life is lived, with
hospital corners and polished shoes. And even then I knew; needing to
kill something every now and then would pretty much sooner or later get
in the way of being squared away.

“How?” I say, and he looks at me long and hard, and then he nods when he
sees that I am with him step for step.

“Good boy,” he says. “Now.” And in spite of saying now, it is a very
long time before he speaks again. I watch the lights on a boat as it
goes past, maybe two hundred yards out from our little beach. Over the
sound of their motor a radio is blasting Cuban music. “Now,” Harry says
again, and I look at him. But he is looking away, across the dying fire,
off into the future over there somewhere. “It's like this,” he says. I
listen carefully. This is what Harry says when he is giving you a
higher-order truth. When he showed me how to throw a curve ball, and how
to throw a left hook. /It's like this/, he would say, and it always was,
just like that.

“I'm getting old, Dexter.” He waited for me to object, but I didn't, and
he nodded. “I think people understand things different when they get
older,” he says. “It's not a question of getting soft, or seeing things
in the gray areas instead of black and white. I really believe I'm just
understanding things different. Better.” He looks at me, Harry's look,
Tough Love with blue eyes.

“Okay,” I say.

“Ten years ago I would have wanted you in an institution somewhere,” he
says, and I blink. That almost hurts, except I've thought of it myself.
“Now,” he says, “I think I know better. I know what you are, and I know
you're a good kid.”

“No,” I say, and it comes out very soft and weak, but Harry hears.

“Yes,” he says firmly. “You're a good kid, Dex, I know that. I /know/
it,” almost to himself now, for effect maybe, and then his eyes lock
onto mine. “Otherwise, you wouldn't care what I thought, or what Mom
thought. You'd just do it. You can't help it, I know that. Because—” He
stops and just looks at me for a moment. It's very uncomfortable for me.
“What do you remember from before?” he asked. “You know. Before we took
you in.”

That still hurts, but I really don't know why. I was only three. “Nothing.”

“Good,” he says. “Nobody should remember that.” And as long as he lives
that will be the most he ever says about it. “But even though you don't
remember, Dex, it did things to you. Those things make you what you are.
I've talked to some people about this.” And strangest of strange, he
gives me a very small, almost shy, Harry smile. “I've been expecting
this. What happened to you when you were a little kid has shaped you.
I've tried to straighten that out, but—” He shrugs. “It was too strong,
too much. It got into you too early and it's going to stay there. It's
going to make you want to kill. And you can't help that. You can't
change that. But,” he says, and he looks away again, to see what I can't
tell. “But you can channel it. Control it. Choose—” his words come so
carefully now, more careful than I've ever heard him talk “—choose what
. . . or /who/ . . . you kill . . .” And he gave me a smile unlike any I
had ever seen before, a smile as bleak and dry as the ashes of our dying
fire. “There are plenty of people who deserve it, Dex . . .”

And with those few little words he gave a shape to my whole life, my
everything, my who and what I am. The wonderful, all-seeing, all-knowing
man. Harry. My dad.

If only I was capable of love, how I would have loved Harry.

 

So long ago now. Harry long dead. But his lessons had lived on. Not
because of any warm and gooey emotional feelings I had. Because Harry
was right. I'd proved that over and over. Harry knew, and Harry taught
me well.

/Be careful/, Harry said. And he taught me to be careful as only a cop
could teach a killer.

To choose carefully among those who deserved it. To make absolutely
sure. Then tidy up. Leave no traces. And always avoid emotional
involvement; it can lead to mistakes.

Being careful went beyond the actual killing, of course. Being careful
meant building a careful life, too. Compartmentalize. Socialize. Imitate
life.

All of which I had done, so very carefully. I was a near perfect
hologram. Above suspicion, beyond reproach, and beneath contempt. A neat
and polite monster, the boy next door. Even Deborah was at least half
fooled, half the time. Of course, she believed what she wanted to
believe, too.

Right now she believed I could help her solve these murders, jump-start
her career and catapult her out of her Hollywood sex suit and into a
tailored business suit. And she was right, of course. I could help her.
But I didn't really want to, because I enjoyed watching this other
killer work and felt some kind of aesthetic connection, or—

/Emotional involvement/.

Well. There it was. I was in clear violation of the Code of Harry.

I nosed the boat back toward my canal. It was full dark now, but I
steered by a radio tower a few degrees to the left of my home water.

So be it. Harry had always been right, he was right now. /Don't get
emotionally involved/, Harry had said. So I wouldn't.

I would help Deb.

CHAPTER 5

THE NEXT MORNING IT WAS RAINING AND THE traffic was crazy, like it
always is in Miami when it rains. Some drivers slowed down on the slick
roads. That made others furious, and they leaned on their horns,
screamed out their windows, and accelerated out onto the shoulder,
fishtailing wildly past the slowpokes and waving their fists.

At the LeJeune on-ramp, a huge dairy truck had roared onto the shoulder
and hit a van full of kids from a Catholic school. The dairy truck
flipped over. And now five young girls in plaid wool skirts were sitting
in a huge puddle of milk with dazed looks on their faces. Traffic nearly
stopped for an hour. One kid was airlifted to Jackson Hospital. The
others sat in the milk in their uniforms and watched the grown-ups
scream at each other.

I inched along placidly, listening to the radio. Apparently the police
were hot on the trail of the Tamiami Butcher. There were no specifics
available, but Captain Matthews got a lovely sound bite. He made it seem
like he would personally make the arrest as soon as he finished his coffee.

I finally got off onto surface roads and went only a little faster. I
stopped at a doughnut shop not too far from the airport. I bought an
apple fritter and a cruller, but the apple fritter was gone almost
before I got back into the car. I have a very high metabolism. It comes
with living the good life.

The rain had stopped by the time I got to work. The sun shone and steam
rose from the pavement as I walked into the lobby, flashed my
credentials, and went upstairs.

Deb was already waiting for me.

She did not look happy this morning. Of course, she does not look happy
very often any more. She's a cop, after all, and most of them can't
manage the trick at all. Too much time on duty trying not to look human.
It leaves their faces stuck.

“Deb,” I said. I put the crisp white pastry bag on my desk.

“Where were you last night?” she said. Very sour, as I'd expected. Soon
those frown lines would turn permanent, ruining a wonderful face: deep
blue eyes, alive with intelligence, and small upturned nose with just a
dash of freckles, framed by black hair. Beautiful features, at the
moment spattered with about seven pounds of cheap makeup.

I looked at her with fondness. She was clearly coming from work, dressed
today in a lacy bra, bright pink spandex shorts, and gold high heels.
“Never mind me,” I said. “Where were /you/?”

She flushed. She hated to wear anything but clean, pressed blues. “I
tried to call you,” she said.

“Sorry,” I said.

“Yeah. Sure.”

I sat down in my chair and didn't speak. Deb likes to unload on me.
That's what family is for. “Why were you so anxious to talk to me?”

“They're shutting me out,” she said. She opened my doughnut bag and
looked inside.

“What did you expect?” I said. “You know how LaGuerta feels about you.”

She pulled the cruller out of the bag and savaged it.

“I expect,” she said, mouth full, “to be in on this. Like the captain said.”

“You don't have any seniority,” I said. “Or any political smarts.”

She crumpled the bag and threw it at my head. She missed. “Goddamn it,
Dexter,” she said. “You know damned well I deserve to be in Homicide.
Instead of—” She snapped her bra strap and waved a hand at her skimpy
costume. “This bullshit.”

I nodded. “Although on you it looks good,” I said.

She made an awful face: rage and disgust competing for space. “I hate
this,” she said. “I can't do this much longer or I swear, I'll go nuts.”

“It's a little soon for me to have the whole thing figured out, Deb.”

“Shit,” she said. Whatever else you could say about police work, it was
ruining Deborah's vocabulary. She gave me a cold, hard cop-look, the
first I'd ever had from her. It was Harry's look, the same eyes, same
feeling of looking right through you to the truth. “Don't bullshit me,
Dex,” she said. “All you have to do half the time is see the body, and
you know who did it. I never asked you how you do that, but if you have
any hunches on this one, I want 'em.” She kicked out savagely and put a
small dent in my metal desk. “Goddamn it, I want out of this stupid outfit.”

“And we'd all love to see that, Morgan,” came a deep and phony voice
from behind her in the doorway. I looked up. Vince Masuoka was smiling
in at us.

“You wouldn't know what to do, Vince,” Deb told him.

He smiled bigger, that bright, fake, textbook smile. “Why don't we try
it and find out?”

“In your dreams, Vince,” Debbie said, slumping into a pout that I hadn't
seen since she was twelve.

Vince nodded at the crumpled white bag on my desk. “It /was/ your turn,
goody. What'd you bring me? Where is it?”

“Sorry, Vince,” I said. “Debbie ate your cruller.”

“I wish,” he said, with his sharp, imitation leer. “Then I could eat her
jelly roll. You owe me a big doughnut, Dex,” he said.

“The only big one you'll ever have,” Deborah said.

“It's not the size of the doughnut, it's the skill of the baker,” Vince
told her.

“Please,” I said. “You two are going to sprain a frontal lobe. It's too
early to be this clever.”

“Ah-ha,” Vince said, with his terrible fake laugh. “Ah-ha ha-ha. See you
later.” He winked. “Don't forget my doughnut.” And he wandered away to
his microscope down the hall.

“So what have you figured out?” Deb asked me.

Deb believed that every now and then I got hunches. She had reason to
believe. Usually my inspired guesses had to do with the brutal whackos
who liked to hack up some poor slob every few weeks just for the hell of
it. Several times Deborah had seen me put a quick and clean finger on
something that nobody else knew was there. She had never said anything,
but my sister is a damned good cop, and so she has suspected me of
something for quite a while. She doesn't know what, but she knows there
is something wrong there and it bothers the hell out of her every now
and then, because she does, after all, love me. The last living thing on
the earth that does love me. This is not self-pity but the coldest,
clearest self-knowledge. I am unlovable. Following Harry's plan, I have
tried to involve myself in other people, in relationships, and even—in
my sillier moments—in love. But it doesn't work. Something in me is
broken or missing, and sooner or later the other person catches me
Acting, or one of Those Nights comes along.

I can't even keep pets. Animals hate me. I bought a dog once; it barked
and howled—at /me/—in a nonstop no-mind fury for two days before I had
to get rid of it. I tried a turtle. I touched it once and it wouldn't
come out of its shell again, and after a few days of that it died.
Rather than see me or have me touch it again, it died.

Nothing else loves me, or ever will. Not even—especially—me. I know what
I am and that is not a thing to love. I am alone in the world, all
alone, but for Deborah. Except, of course, for the Thing inside, who
does not come out to play too often. And does not actually play with me
but must have somebody else.

So as much as I can, I care about her, dear Deborah. It is probably not
love, but I would rather she were happy.

And she sat there, dear Deborah, looking unhappy. My family. Staring at
me and not knowing what to say, but coming closer to saying it than ever
before.

“Well,” I said, “actually—”

“I /knew/ it! You /DO/ have something!”

“Don't interrupt my trance, Deborah. I'm in touch with the spirit realm.”

“Spit it out,” she said.

“It's the interrupted cut, Deb. The left leg.”

“What about it?”

“LaGuerta thinks the killer was discovered. Got nervous, didn't finish.”

Deborah nodded. “She had me asking hookers last night if they saw
anything. Somebody must have.”

“Oh, not you, too,” I said. “/Think/, Deborah. If he was interrupted—too
scared to finish—”

“The wrapping,” she blurted. “He still spent a lot of time wrapping the
body, cleaning up.” She looked surprised. “Shit. /After/ he was
interrupted?”

I clapped my hands and beamed at her. “Bravo, Miss Marple.”

“Then it doesn't make sense.”

“Au contraire. If there is plenty of time, but the ritual is not
completed properly—and remember, Deb, the ritual is nearly
everything—what's the implication?”

“Why can't you just tell me, for God's sake?” she snapped.

“What fun would that be?”

She blew out a hard breath. “Goddamn it. All right, Dex. If he wasn't
interrupted, but he didn't finish— Shit. The wrapping-up part was more
important than the cutting?”

I took pity on her. “No, Deb. Think. This is the fifth one, exactly like
all the others. Four left legs cut perfectly. And now number five—” I
shrugged, raised an eyebrow at her.

“Aw, shit, Dexter. How should I know? Maybe he only needed four left
legs. Maybe . . . I don't know, I swear to God. What?”

I smiled and shook my head. To me it was so clear. “The thrill is gone,
Deb. Something just isn't right. It isn't working. Some essential bit of
the magic that makes it perfect, isn't there.”

“I was supposed to figure that out?”

“Somebody should, don't you think? And so he just sort of dribbles to a
stop, looking for inspiration and finding none.”

She frowned. “So he's done. He won't do this again?”

I laughed. “Oh my God, no, Deb. Just the opposite. If you were a priest,
and you truly believed in God but couldn't find the right way to worship
him, what would you do?”

“Keep trying,” she said, “until I got it right.” She stared hard.
“Jesus. That's what you think? He's going to do it again soon?”

“It's just a hunch,” I said modestly. “I could be wrong.” But I was sure
I was not wrong.

“We should be setting up a way to catch him when he does,” she said.
“Not looking for a nonexistent witness.” She stood and headed out the
door. “I'll call later. Bye!” And she was gone.

I poked at the white paper bag. There was nothing left inside. Just like
me: a clean, crisp outside and nothing at all on the inside.

I folded the bag and placed it in the trash can beside my desk. There
was work to do this morning, real official police lab work. I had a long
report to type up, accompanying pictures to sort, evidence to file. It
was routine stuff, a double homicide that would probably never go to
trial, but I like to make sure that whatever I touch is well organized.

Besides, this one had been interesting. The blood spatter had been very
difficult to read; between the arterial spurting, the multiple
victims—obviously moving around—and the cast-off pattern from what had
to be a chain saw, it had been almost impossible to find an impact site.
In order to cover the whole room, I'd had to use two bottles of Luminol,
which reveals even the faintest of blood spots and is shockingly
expensive at $12 a bottle.

I'd actually had to lay out strings to help me figure the primary
spatter angles, a technique ancient enough to seem like alchemy. The
splat patterns were startling, vivid; there were bright, wild, feral
splatters across the walls, furniture, television, towels, bedspreads,
curtains—an amazing wild horror of flying blood. Even in Miami you would
think someone would have heard something. Two people being hacked up
alive with a chain saw, in an elegant and expensive hotel room, and the
neighbors simply turned up their TVs.

You may say that dear diligent Dexter gets carried away in his job, but
I like to be thorough, and I like to know where all the blood is hiding.
The professional reasons for this are obvious, but not quite as
important to me as the personal ones. Perhaps someday a psychiatrist
retained by the state penal system will help me discover exactly why.

In any case, the body chunks were very cold by the time we got to the
scene, and we would probably never find the guy in the size 71⁄2
handmade Italian loafer. Right-handed and overweight, with a terrific
backhand.

But I had persevered and done a very neat piece of work. I don't do my
job to catch the bad guys. Why would I want to do that? No, I do my job
to make order out of chaos. To force the nasty blood stains to behave
properly, and then go away. Others may use my work to catch criminals;
that's fine by me, but it doesn't matter.

If I am ever careless enough to be caught, they will say I am a
sociopathic monster, a sick and twisted demon who is not even human, and
they will probably send me to die in Old Sparky with a smug
self-righteous glow. If they ever catch Size 71⁄2, they will say he is a
bad man who went wrong because of social forces he was too unfortunate
to resist, and he will go to jail for ten years before they turn him
loose with enough money for a suit and a new chain saw.

Every day at work I understand Harry a little better.

CHAPTER 6

FRIDAY NIGHT. DATE NIGHT IN MIAMI. AND believe it or not, Date Night
for Dexter. Oddly enough, I had found somebody. What, what? Deeply dead
Dexter dating debutante doxies? Sex among the Undead? Has my need to
imitate life gone all the way to faking orgasms?

Breathe easy. Sex never entered into it. After years of dreadful
fumbling and embarrassment trying to look normal, I had finally hooked
up with the perfect date.

Rita was almost as badly damaged as I am. Married too young, she had
fought to make it work for ten years and two kids. Her charming life
mate had a few small problems. First alcohol, then heroin, believe it or
not, and finally crack. He beat her, the brute. Broke furniture,
screamed, and threw things and made threats. Then raped her. Infected
her with some dreadful crack-house diseases. All this on a regular
basis, and Rita endured, worked, fought him through rehab twice. Then he
went after the kids one night and Rita finally put her foot down.

Her face had healed by now, of course. And broken arms and ribs are
routine for Miami physicians. Rita was quite presentable, just what the
monster ordered.

The divorce was final, the brute was locked up, and then? Ah, the
mysteries of the human mind. Somehow, somewhy, dear Rita had decided to
date again. She was quite sure it was the Right Thing to do—but as a
result of her frequent battery at the hands of the Man She Loved, she
was completely uninterested in sex. Just, maybe, some masculine company
for a while.

She had searched for just the right guy: sensitive, gentle, and willing
to wait. Quite a long search, of course. She was looking for some
imaginary man who cared more about having someone to talk to and see
movies with than someone to have sex with, because she was Just Not
Ready for That.

Did I say imaginary? Well, yes. Human men are not like that. Most women
know this by the time they've had two kids and their first divorce. Poor
Rita had married too young and too badly to learn this valuable lesson.
And as a by-product of recovering from her awful marriage, instead of
realizing that all men are beasts, she had come up with this lovely
romantic picture of a perfect gentleman who would wait indefinitely for
her to open slowly, like a little flower.

Well. Really. Perhaps such a man existed in Victorian England—when there
was a knocking shop on every corner where he could blow off steam
between flowery protestations of frictionless love. But not, to my
knowledge, in twenty-first-century Miami.

And yet—I could imitate all those things perfectly. And I actually
wanted to. I had no interest in a sexual relationship. I wanted a
disguise; Rita was exactly what I was looking for.

She was, as I say, very presentable. Petite and pert and spunky, a slim
athletic figure, short blond hair, and blue eyes. She was a fitness
fanatic, spending all her off-hours running and biking and so on. In
fact, sweating was one of our favorite activities. We had cycled through
the Everglades, done 5K runs, and even pumped iron together.

And best of all were her two children. Astor was eight and Cody was five
and they were much too quiet. They would be, of course. Children whose
parents frequently attempt to kill each other with the furniture tend to
be slightly withdrawn. Any child brought up in a horror zone is. But
they can be brought out of it eventually—look at me. I had endured
nameless and unknown horrors as a child, and yet here I was: a useful
citizen, a pillar of the community.

Perhaps that was part of my strange liking for Astor and Cody. Because I
did like them, and that made no sense to me. I know what I am and I
understand many things about myself. But one of the few character traits
that genuinely mystifies me is my attitude toward children.

I like them.

They are important to me. They matter.

I don't understand it, really. I genuinely wouldn't care if every human
in the universe were suddenly to expire, with the possible exception of
myself and maybe Deborah. Other people are less important to me than
lawn furniture. I do not, as the shrinks put it so eloquently, have any
sense of the reality of others. And I am not burdened with this realization.

But kids—kids are different.

I had been “dating” Rita for nearly a year and a half, and in that time
I had slowly and deliberately won over Astor and Cody. I was okay. I
wouldn't hurt them. I remembered their birthdays, report-card days,
holidays. I could come into their house and would do no harm. I could be
trusted.

Ironic, really. But true.

Me, the only man they could really trust. Rita thought it was part of my
long slow courtship of her. Show her that the kids liked me and who
knows? But in fact, they mattered to me more than she did. Maybe it was
already too late, but I didn't want to see them grow up to be like me.

This Friday night Astor answered the door. She was wearing a large
T-shirt that said RUG RATS and hung below her knees. Her red hair was
pulled back in two pigtails and she had no expression at all on her
small still face.

“Hello Dexter,” she said in her too-quiet way. For her, two words were a
long conversation.

“Good evening, beautiful young lady,” I said in my best Lord Mountbatten
voice. “May I observe that you are looking very lovely this evening?”

“Okay,” she said, holding the door open. “He's here,” she said over her
shoulder to the darkness around the couch.

I stepped past her. Cody was standing behind her, just inside, like he
was backing her up, just in case. “Cody,” I said. I handed him a roll of
Necco Wafers. He took them without taking his eyes off me and simply let
his hand drop to his side without looking at the candy. He wouldn't open
them until I was gone, and then he would split them with his sister.

“Dexter?” Rita called from the next room.

“In here,” I said. “Can't you teach these children to behave?”

“No,” said Cody softly.

A joke. I stared at him. What next? Would he sing someday? Tap dance in
the streets? Address the Democratic National Convention?

Rita rustled in, fastening a hoop earring. She was rather provocative,
considering. She wore a practically weightless light blue silk dress
that fell to mid-thigh, and of course her very best New Balance
cross-training shoes. I'd never before met, or even heard of, a woman
who actually wore comfortable shoes on dates. The enchanting creature.

“Hey, handsome,” Rita said. “Let me talk to the sitter and we're out of
here.” She went into the kitchen, where I heard her going over
instructions with the teenage neighbor who did her babysitting.
Bedtimes. Homework. TV dos and don'ts. Cell phone number. Emergency
number. What to do in case of accidental poisoning or decapitation.

Cody and Astor still stared at me.

“Are you going to a movie?” Astor asked me.

I nodded. “If we can find one that doesn't make us throw up.”

“Yuk,” she said. She made a very small sour face and I felt a tiny glow
of accomplishment.

“Do you throw up at the movies?” Cody asked.

“Cody,” Astor said.

“Do you?” he insisted.

“No,” I said. “But I usually want to.”

“Let's go,” said Rita, sailing in and bending to give each kid a peck on
the cheek. “Listen to Alice. Bedtime at nine.”

“Will you come back?” Cody asked.

“Cody! Of course I'll be back,” Rita said.

“I meant Dexter,” Cody said.

“You'll be asleep,” I said. “But I'll wave at you, okay?”

“I won't be asleep,” he said grimly.

“Then I'll stop in and play cards with you,” I said.

“Really?”

“Absolutely. High-stakes poker. Winner gets to keep the horses.”

“Dexter!” Rita said, smiling anyway. “You'll be asleep, Cody. Now good
night, kids. Be good.” And she took my arm and lead me out the door.
“Honestly,” she murmured. “You've got those two eating out of your hand.”

The movie was nothing special. I didn't really want to throw up, but I'd
forgotten most of it by the time we stopped at a small place in South
Beach for a late-night drink. Rita's idea. In spite of living in Miami
for most of her life, she still thought South Beach was glamorous.
Perhaps it was all the Rollerblades. Or maybe she thought that anyplace
so full of people with bad manners /had/ to be glamorous.

In any case, we waited twenty minutes for a small table and then sat and
waited another twenty for service. I didn't mind. I enjoyed watching
good-looking idiots looking at each other. A great spectator sport.

We strolled along Ocean Boulevard afterward, making pointless
conversation—an art at which I excel. It was a lovely night. One corner
was chewed off the full moon of a few nights ago, when I had entertained
Father Donovan.

And as we drove back to Rita's South Miami house after our standard
evening out, we passed an intersection in one of Coconut Grove's less
wholesome areas. A winking red light caught my eye and I glanced down
the side street. Crime scene: the yellow tape was already up, and
several cruisers were nosed into a hurried splay.

/It's him again/, I thought, and even before I knew what I meant by that
I was swinging the car down the street to the crime scene.

“Where are we going?” Rita asked, quite reasonably.

“Ah,” I said. “I'd like to check here and see if they need me.”

“Don't you have a beeper?”

I gave her my best Friday-night smile. “They don't always /know/ they
need me,” I said.

I might have stopped anyway, to show off Rita. The whole point of
wearing a disguise was to be seen wearing her. But in truth, the small
irresistible voice yammering in my ear would have made me stop no matter
what. /It's him again/. And I had to see what he was up to. I left Rita
in the car and hurried over.

He was up to no good again, the rascal. There was the same stack of
neatly wrapped body parts. Angel-no-relation bent over it in almost the
same position he'd been in when I left him at the last scene.

“/Hijo de puta/,” he said when I approached him.

“Not me, I trust,” I said.

“The rest of us are complaining that we have to work on Friday night,”
Angel said. “You show up with a date. And there is /still/ nothing for
you here.”

“Same guy, same pattern?”

“Same,” he said. He flipped the plastic away with his pen. “Bone dry,
again,” he said. “No blood at all.”

The words made me feel slightly light-headed. I leaned in for a look.
Once again the body parts were amazingly clean and dry. They had a near
blue tinge to them and seemed preserved in their small perfect moment of
time. Wonderful.

“A small difference in the cuts this time,” Angel said. “In four
places.” He pointed. “Very rough here, almost emotional. Then here, not
so much. Here and here, in between. Huh?”

“Very nice,” I said.

“And then lookit this,” he said. He nudged aside the bloodless chunk on
top with a pencil. Underneath another piece gleamed white. The flesh had
been flayed off very carefully, lengthwise, to reveal a clean bone.

“Why he would do like that?” Angel asked softly.

I breathed. “He's experimenting,” I said. “Trying to find the right
way.” And I stared at the neat, dry section until I became aware that
Angel had been looking at me for a very long moment.

“Like a kid playing with his food,” is how I described it to Rita when I
returned to the car.

“My God,” Rita said. “That's horrible.”

“I think the correct word is /heinous/,” I said.

“How can you joke about it, Dexter?”

I gave her a reassuring smile. “You kind of get used to it in my line of
work,” I said. “We all make jokes to hide our pain.”

“Well, good lord, I hope they catch this maniac soon.”

I thought of the neatly stacked body parts, the variety of the cuts, the
wonderful total lack of blood. “Not too soon,” I said.

“What did you say?” she asked.

“I said, I don't think it will be too soon. The killer is extremely
clever, and the detective in charge of the case is more interested in
playing politics than in solving murders.”

She looked at me to see if I was kidding. Then she sat quietly for a
while as we drove south on U.S. 1. She didn't speak until South Miami.
“I can never get used to seeing . . . I don't know. The underside? The
way things really are? The way you see it,” she finally said.

She took me by surprise. I had been using the silence to think about the
nicely stacked body parts we had just left. My mind had been hungrily
circling the clean dry chopped-up limbs like an eagle looking for a
chunk of meat to rip out. Rita's observation was so unexpected I
couldn't even stutter for a minute. “What do you mean?” I managed to say
at last.

She frowned. “I—I'm not sure. Just— We all assume that . . . /things/ .
. . really are a certain way. The way they're supposed to be? And then
they never are, they're always more . . . I don't know. Darker? More
human. Like this. I'm thinking, of course the detective wants to catch
the killer, isn't that what detectives do? And it never occurred to me
before that there could be anything at all political about murder.”

“Practically everything,” I said. I turned onto her street and slowed
down in front of her neat and unremarkable house.

“But you,” she said. She didn't seem to notice where we were or what I
had said. “That's where you start. Most people would never really think
it through that far.”

“I'm not all that deep, Rita,” I said. I nudged the car into park.

“It's like, everything really is two ways, the way we all pretend it is
and the way it really is. And you already know that and it's like a game
for you.”

I had no idea what she was trying to say. In truth, I had given up
trying to figure it out and, as she spoke, I'd let my mind wander back
to the newest murder; the cleanness of the flesh, the improvisational
quality of the cuts, the complete dry spotless immaculate lack of blood—

“Dexter—” Rita said. She put a hand on my arm.

I kissed her.

I don't know which one of us was more surprised. It really wasn't
something I had thought about doing ahead of time. And it certainly
wasn't her perfume. But I mashed my lips against hers and held them
there for a long moment.

She pushed away.

“No,” she said. “I— No, Dexter.”

“All right,” I said, still shocked at what I had done.

“I don't think I want to—I'm not /ready/ for— Damn it, Dexter,” she
said. She unclipped her seat belt, opened the car door, and ran into her
house.

/Oh, dear/, I thought. /What on earth have I done now?/

And I knew I should be wondering about that, and perhaps feeling
disappointed that I had just destroyed my disguise after a year and a
half of hard maintenance.

But all I could think about was that neat stack of body parts.

/No blood./

None at all.

CHAPTER 7

THIS BODY IS STRETCHED OUT JUST THE WAY I LIKE /it. The/ /arms and
legs are secure and the mouth is stopped with duct tape so there will be
no noise and no spill into my work area. And my hand feels so steady
with the knife that I am quite sure this will be a good one, very
satisfying—/

/Except it's not a knife, it's some kind of—/

/Except it's not my hand. Even though my hand is moving with this hand,
it's not mine that holds the blade. And the room really is sort of
small, it's so narrow, which makes sense because it's—what?/

/And now here I am floating above this perfect tight work space and its
tantalizing body and for the first time I feel the cold blowing around
me and even through me somehow. And if I could only feel my teeth I am
quite sure they would chatter. And my hand in perfect unison with that
other hand goes up and arches back for a perfect cut—/

And of course I wake up in my apartment. Standing somehow by the front
door, completely naked. Sleepwalking I could understand, but sleep
stripping? Really. I stumble back to my little trundle bed. The covers
are in a heap on the floor. The air conditioner has kicked the
temperature down close to sixty. It had seemed like a good idea at the
time, last night, feeling a little estranged from it all after what had
happened with Rita. Preposterous, if it had really happened. Dexter, the
love bandit, stealing kisses. And so I had taken a long hot shower when
I got home and shoved the thermostat all the way down as I climbed into
bed. I don't pretend to understand why, but in my darker moments I find
cold cleansing. Not refreshing so much as necessary.

And cold it was. Far too cold now, for coffee and the start of the day
amid the last tattered pieces of the dream.

As a rule I don't remember my dreams, and don't attach any importance to
them if I do. So it was ridiculous that this one was staying with me.

/—floating above this perfect tight work space—my hand in perfect unison
with that other hand goes up and arches back for a perfect cut—/

I've read the books. Perhaps because I'll never be one, humans are
interesting to me. So I know all the symbolism: Floating is a form of
flying, meaning sex. And the knife—

Ja, Herr Doktor. The knife ist eine mother, ja?

Snap out of it, Dexter.

Just a stupid, meaningless dream.

The telephone rang and I almost jumped out of my skin.

“How about breakfast at Wolfie's?” said Deborah. “My treat.”

“It's Saturday morning,” I said. “We'll never get in.”

“I'll get there first and get a table,” she said. “Meet you there.”

Wolfie's Deli on Miami Beach was a Miami tradition. And because the
Morgans are a Miami family, we had been eating there all our lives on
those special deli occasions. Why Deborah thought today might be one of
those occasions was beyond me, but I was sure she would enlighten me in
time. So I took a shower, dressed in my casual Saturday best, and drove
out to the Beach. Traffic was light over the new improved MacArthur
Causeway, and soon I was politely elbowing my way through the teeming
throngs at Wolfie's.

True to her word, Deborah had corralled a corner table. She was chatting
with an ancient waitress, a woman even I recognized. “Rose, my love,” I
said, bending to kiss her wrinkled cheek. She turned her permanent scowl
on me. “My wild Irish Rose.”

“Dexter,” she rasped, with her thick middle-European accent. “Knock off
with the kiss, like some faigelah.”

“Faigelah. Is that Irish for fiancé?” I asked her, and slid into my chair.

“Feh,” she said, trudging off to the kitchen and shaking her head at me.

“I think she likes me,” I told Deborah.

“Somebody should,” said Deb. “How was your date last night?”

“A lot of fun,” I said. “You should try it sometime.”

“Feh,” said Deborah.

“You can't spend all your nights standing on Tamiami Trail in your
underwear, Deb. You need a life.”

“I need a transfer,” she snarled at me. “To Homicide Bureau. Then we'll
see about a life.”

“I understand,” I said. “It would certainly sound better for the kids to
say Mommie's in homicide.”

“Dexter, for Christ's sake,” she said.

“It's a natural thought, Deborah. Nephews and nieces. More little
Morgans. Why not?”

She blew out a long breath. “I thought Mom was dead,” she said.

“I'm channeling her,” I said. “Through the cherry Danish.”

“Well, change the channel. What do you know about cell crystallization?”

I blinked. “Wow,” I said. “You just blew away all the competition in the
Subject Changing Tournament.”

“I'm serious,” she said.

“Then I really am floored, Deb. What do you mean, cell crystallization?”

“From cold,” she said. “Cells that have crystallized from cold.”

Light flooded my brain. “Of course,” I said, “beautiful,” and somewhere
deep inside small bells began to ring. /Cold . . . Clean, pure cold and
the cool knife almost sizzling as it slices into the warm flesh.
Antiseptic clean coldness, the blood slowed and helpless, so absolutely
right and totally necessary; cold/. “Why didn't I—” I started to say. I
shut up when I saw Deborah's face.

“What,” Deb demanded. “What of course?”

I shook my head. “First tell me why you want to know.”

She looked at me for a long hard moment and blew out another breath. “I
think you know,” she said at last. “There's been another murder.”

“I know,” I said. “I passed it last night.”

“I heard you didn't actually pass it.”

I shrugged. Metro Dade is such a small family.

“So what did that ‘of course' mean?”

“Nothing,” I said, mildly irritated at last. “The flesh of the body just
looked a little different. If it was subjected to cold—” I held out my
hands. “That's all, okay? How cold?”

“Like meat-packing cold,” she said. “Why would he do that?”

/Because it's beautiful/, I thought. “It would slow the flow of blood,”
I said.

She studied me. “Is that important?”

I took a long and perhaps slightly shaky breath. Not only could I never
explain it, she would lock me up if I tried. “It's vital,” I said. For
some reason I felt embarrassed.

“Why vital?”

“It, ah—I don't know. I think he has a thing about blood, Deb. Just a
feeling I got from—I don't know, no evidence, you know.”

She was giving me that look again. I tried to think of something to say,
but I couldn't. Glib, silver-tongued Dexter, with a dry mouth and
nothing to say.

“Shit,” she said at last. “That's it? Cold slows the blood, and that's
vital? Come on. What the hell good is that, Dexter?”

“I don't do ‘good' before coffee, Deborah,” I said with a heroic effort
at recovery. “Just accurate.”

“Shit,” she said again. Rose brought our coffee. Deborah sipped. “Last
night I got an invite to the seventy-two-hour briefing,” she said.

I clapped my hands. “Wonderful. You've arrived. What do you need me
for?” Metro Dade has a policy of pulling the homicide team together
approximately seventy-two hours after a murder. The investigating
officer and her team talk it over with the Medical Examiner and,
sometimes, someone from the prosecutor's office. It keeps everyone on
the same heading. If Deborah had been invited, she was on the case.

She scowled. “I'm not good at politics, Dexter. I can feel LaGuerta
pushing me out, but I can't do anything about it.”

“Is she still looking for her mystery witness?”

Deborah nodded.

“Really. Even after the new kill last night?”

“She says that proves it. Because the new cuts were all complete.”

“But they were all /different/,” I protested.

She shrugged.

“And you suggested—?”

Deb looked away. “I told her I thought it was a waste of time to look
for a witness when it was obvious that the killer wasn't interrupted,
just unsatisfied.”

“Ouch,” I said. “You really /don't/ know anything about politics.”

“Well, goddamn it, Dex,” she said. Two old ladies at the next table
glared at her. She didn't notice. “What you said made sense. It /is/
obvious, and she's ignoring me. And even worse.”

“What could be worse than being ignored?” I said.

She blushed. “I caught a couple of the uniforms snickering at me
afterward. There's a joke going around, and I'm it.” She bit her lip and
looked away. “Einstein,” she said.

“I'm afraid I don't get it.”

“If my tits were brains, I'd be Einstein,” she said bitterly. I cleared
my throat instead of laughing. “That's what she's spreading about me,”
Deb went on. “That kind of crappy little tag sticks to you, and then
they don't promote you because they think nobody will respect you with a
nickname like that. God/damn/ it, Dex,” she said again, “she's ruining
my career.”

I felt a little surge of protective warmth. “She's an idiot.”

“Should I tell her that, Dex? Would that be political?”

Our food arrived. Rose slammed the plates down in front of us as though
she had been condemned by a corrupt judge to serve breakfast to baby
killers. I gave her a gigantic smile and she trudged away, muttering to
herself.

I took a bite and turned my thoughts to Deborah's problem. I had to try
to think of it that way, Deborah's problem. Not “those fascinating
murders.” Not “that amazingly attractive MO,” or “the thing so similar
to what I would love to do someday.” I had to stay uninvolved, but this
was pulling at me so very hard. Even last night's dream, with its cold
air. Pure coincidence, of course, but unsettling anyway.

This killer had touched the heart of what my killing was about. In the
way he worked, of course, and not in his selection of victims. He had to
be stopped, certainly, no question. Those poor hookers.

Still . . . The need for cold . . . So very interesting to explore
sometime. Find a nice dark, narrow place . . .

Narrow? Where had that come from?

My dream, naturally. But that was just saying that my unconscious wanted
me to think about it, wasn't it? And narrow felt right somehow. Cold and
narrow—

“Refrigerated truck,” I said.

I opened my eyes. Deborah struggled mightily with a mouthful of eggs
before she could speak. “What?”

“Oh, just a guess. Not a real insight, I'm afraid. But wouldn't it make
sense?”

“Wouldn't what make sense?” she asked.

I looked down at my plate and frowned, trying to picture how this would
work. “He wants a cold environment. To slow the blood flow, and because
it's, uh—cleaner.”

“If you say so.”

“I do say so. And it has to be a narrow space—”

“Why? Where the hell did that come from, narrow?”

I chose not to hear that question. “So a refrigerated truck would fit
those conditions, and it's mobile, which makes it much easier to dump
the garbage afterward.”

Deborah took a bite of bagel and thought for a moment while she chewed.
“So,” she said at last, and swallowed. “The killer might have access to
one of these trucks? Or own one?”

“Mmm, maybe. Except the kill last night was the first that showed signs
of cold.”

Deborah frowned. “So he went out and bought a truck?”

“Probably not. This is still experimental. It was probably an impulse to
try cold.”

She nodded. “And we would never get lucky enough that he drives one for
a living or something, right?”

I gave her my happy shark smile. “Ah, Deb. How quick you are this
morning. No, I'm afraid our friend is much too smart to connect himself
that way.”

Deborah sipped her coffee, put the cup down, and leaned back. “So we're
looking for a stolen refrigerator truck,” she said at last.

“I'm afraid so,” I said. “But how many of those can there be in the last
forty-eight hours?”

“In Miami?” She snorted. “Somebody steals one, word gets out that it's
worth stealing, and suddenly every goddamn two-bit original gangsta,
marielito, crackhead, and junior wise guy has to steal one, just to keep
up.”

“Let's hope word isn't out yet,” I said.

Deborah swallowed the last of her bagel. “I'll check,” she said. And
then she reached across the table and squeezed my hand. “I really
appreciate this,” she said. She gave me a couple of seconds of a shy,
hesitant smile. “But I worry about how you come up with this stuff, Dex.
I just . . .” She looked down at the table and squeezed my hand again.

I squeezed back. “Leave the worrying to me,” I said. “You just find that
truck.”

CHAPTER 8

IN THEORY, METRO'S SEVENTY-TWO-HOUR MEETING gives everyone enough
time to get somewhere with a case, but is soon enough that the leads are
still warm. And so Monday morning, in a conference room on the second
floor, the crack crime-fighting team led by the indomitable Detective
LaGuerta assembled once again for the seventy-two-hour. I assembled with
them. I got some looks, and a few good-hearted remarks from the cops who
knew me. Just simple, cheerful wit, like, “Hey, blood boy, where's your
squeegee?” Salt of the earth, these people, and soon my Deborah would be
one of them. I felt proud and humble to be in the same room.

Unfortunately, these feelings were not shared by all present. “The fuck
you doing here?” grunted Sergeant Doakes. He was a very large black man
with an injured air of permanent hostility. He had a cold ferocity to
him that would certainly come in handy for somebody with my hobby. It
was a shame we couldn't be friends. But for some reason he hated all lab
techs, and for some additional reason that had always meant especially
Dexter. He also held the Metro Dade record for the bench press. So he
rated my political smile.

“I just dropped in to listen, Sergeant,” I told him.

“Got no fucking call to be here,” he said. “The fuck outta here.”

“He can stay, Sergeant,” LaGuerta said.

Doakes scowled at her. “The fuck for?”

“I don't want to make anybody unhappy,” I said, edging for the door
without any real conviction.

“It's perfectly all right,” LaGuerta said with an actual smile for me.
She turned to Doakes. “He can stay,” she repeated.

“Gimme the fucking creeps,” Doakes grumbled. I began to appreciate the
man's finer qualities. Of course I gave him the fucking creeps. The only
real question was why he was the only one in a room filled with cops who
had the insight to get the fucking creeps from my presence.

“Let's get started,” LaGuerta said, cracking her whip gently, leaving no
room for doubt that she was in charge. Doakes slouched back in his chair
with a last scowl at me.

The first part of the meeting was a matter of routine; reports,
political maneuvers, all the little things that make us human. Those of
us who are human, anyway. LaGuerta briefed the information officers on
what they could and could not release to the press. Things they could
release included a new glossy photo of LaGuerta she'd made up for the
occasion. It was serious and yet glamorous; intense but refined. You
could almost see her making lieutenant in that picture. If only Deborah
had that kind of PR smarts.

It took most of an hour before we got around to the actual murders. But
finally LaGuerta asked for reports on the progress in finding her
mystery witness. Nobody had anything to report. I tried hard to look
surprised.

LaGuerta gave the group a frown of command. “Come on, people,” she said.
“Somebody needs to find something here.” But nobody did, and there was a
pause while the group studied their fingernails, the floor, the acoustic
tiles in the ceiling.

Deborah cleared her throat. “I, uh,” she said and cleared her throat
again. “I had a, um, an idea. A different idea. About trying something
in a slightly different direction.” She said it like it was in quotation
marks, and indeed it was. All my careful coaching couldn't make her
sound natural when she said it, but she had at least stuck to my
carefully worded politically correct phrasing.

LaGuerta raised an artificially perfect eyebrow. “An idea? Really?” She
made a face to show how surprised and delighted she was. “Please, by all
means, share it with us, Officer Ein—I mean, Officer Morgan.”

Doakes snickered. A delightful man.

Deborah flushed, but slogged on. “The, um, cell crystallization. On the
last victim. I'd like to check and see if any refrigerated trucks have
been reported stolen in the last week or so.”

Silence. Utter, dumb silence. The silence of the cows. They didn't get
it, the brickheads, and Deborah was not making them see it. She let the
silence grow, a silence LaGuerta milked with a pretty frown, a puzzled
glance around the room to see if anybody else was following this, then a
polite look at Deborah.

“Refrigerated . . . trucks?” LaGuerta said.

Deborah looked completely flustered, the poor child. This was not a girl
who enjoyed public speaking. “That's right,” she said.

LaGuerta let it hang, enjoying it. “Mm-hmm,” she said.

Deborah's face darkened; not a good sign. I cleared my throat, and when
that didn't do any good I coughed, loud enough to remind her to stay
cool. She looked at me. So did LaGuerta. “Sorry,” I said. “I think I'm
getting a cold.”

Could anyone really ask for a better brother?

“The, um, /cold/,” Deborah blurted, lunging at my lifeline. “A
refrigerated vehicle could probably cause that kind of tissue damage.
And it's mobile, so he'd be harder to catch. And getting rid of the body
would be a lot easier. So, uh, if one was stolen, I mean a truck . . . a
refrigerated . . . that might give us a lead.”

Well, that was most of it, and she did get it out there. One or two
thoughtful frowns blossomed around the room. I could almost hear gears
turning.

But LaGuerta just nodded. “That's a very . . . /interesting/ thought,
Officer,” she said. She put just the smallest emphasis on the word
/officer/, to remind us all that this was a democracy where anybody
could speak up, but really . . . “But I still believe that our best bet
is to find the witness. We know he's out there.” She smiled, a
politically shy smile. “Or /she/,” she said, to show that she could be
sharp. “But somebody saw something. We know that from the /evidence/. So
let's concentrate on that, and leave grasping at straws for the guys in
Broward, okay?” She paused, waiting for a little chuckle to run around
the room. “But Officer Morgan, I would appreciate your continued help
talking to the hookers. They know you down there.”

My God, she was good. She had deflected anyone from possibly thinking
about Deb's idea, put Deb in her place, and brought the team back
together behind her with the joke about our rivalry with Broward County.
All in a few simple words. I felt like applauding.

Except, of course, that I was on poor Deborah's team, and she had just
been flattened. Her mouth opened for a moment, then closed, and I
watched her jaw muscles knot as she carefully pushed her face back into
Cop Neutral. In its own way, a fine performance, but truly, not even in
the same league as LaGuerta's.

The rest of the meeting was uneventful. There was really nothing to talk
about beyond what had been said. So very shortly after LaGuerta's
masterful putdown, the meeting broke up and we were in the hall again.

“Damn her,” Deborah muttered under her breath. “Damn, damn, /damn/ her!”

“Absolutely,” I agreed.

She glared at me. “Thanks, bro. Some help you were.”

I raised my eyebrows at her. “But we agreed I would stay out of it. So
you would get the credit.”

She snarled. “Some credit. She made me look like an idiot.”

“With absolute respect, sister dear, you met her halfway.”

Deborah looked at me, looked away, threw up her hands with disgust.
“What was I supposed to say? I'm not even on the team. I'm just there
because the captain said they had to let me in.”

“And he didn't say they had to listen to you,” I said.

“And they don't. And they won't,” Deborah said bitterly. “Instead of
getting me into homicide, this is going to kill my career. I'll die a
meter maid, Dexter.”

“There is a way out, Deb,” I said, and the look she turned on me now was
only about one-third hope.

“What,” she said.

I smiled at her, my most comforting, challenging, I'm-not-really-a-shark
smile. “Find the truck,” I said.

 

It was three days before I heard from my dear foster sister again, a
longish period for her to go without talking to me. She came into my
office just after lunch on Thursday, looking sour. “I found it,” she
said, and I didn't know what she meant.

“Found what, Deb?” I asked. “The Fountain of Grumpiness?”

“The truck,” she said. “The refrigerated truck.”

“But that's great news,” I said. “Why do you look like you're searching
for somebody to slap?”

“Because I am,” she said, and flung four or five stapled pages onto my
desk. “Look at this.”

I picked it up and glanced at the top page. “Oh,” I said. “How many
altogether?”

“Twenty-three,” she said. “In the last month, twenty-three refrigerator
trucks have been reported stolen. The guys over on traffic say most of
'em turn up in canals, torched for the insurance money. Nobody pushes
too hard to find them. So nobody's been pushing on these, and nobody's
going to.”

“Welcome to Miami,” I said.

Deborah sighed and took the list back from me, slouching into my extra
chair like she'd just lost all her bones. “There's no way I can check
them all, not by myself. It would take months. Goddamn it, Dex,” she
said. “Now what do we do?”

I shook my head. “I'm sorry, Deb,” I said. “But now we have to wait.”

“That's it? Just wait?”

“That's it,” I said.

And it was. For two more weeks, that was it. We waited.

And then . . .

CHAPTER 9

I WOKE UP COVERED WITH SWEAT, NOT SURE WHERE I was, and absolutely
certain that another murder was about to happen. Somewhere not so far
away /he/ was searching for his next victim, sliding through the city
like a shark around the reef. I was so certain I could almost hear the
purr of the duct tape. He was out there, feeding his Dark Passenger, and
it was talking to mine. And in my sleep I had been riding with him, a
phantom remora in his great slow circles.

I sat up in my own little bed and peeled away the twisted sheets. The
bedside clock said it was 3:14. Four hours since I'd gone to bed, and I
felt like I'd been slogging through the jungle the entire time with a
piano on my back. I was sweaty, stiff, and stupid, unable to form any
thoughts at all beyond the certainty that it was happening out there
without me.

Sleep was gone for the night, no question. I turned on the light. My
hands were clammy and trembling. I wiped them on the sheet, but that
didn't help. The sheets were just as wet. I stumbled into the bathroom
to wash my hands. I held them under the running water. The tap let out a
stream that was warm, room temperature, and for a moment I was washing
my hands in blood and the water turned red; just for a second, in the
half-light of the bathroom, the sink ran bloodred.

I closed my eyes.

/The world shifted/.

I had meant to get rid of this trick of light and my half-sleeping
brain. Close the eyes, open them, the illusion would be over and it
would be simple clean water in my sink. Instead, it was like closing my
eyes had opened a second set of eyes into another world.

/I was back in my dream, floating like a knife blade above the lights of
Biscayne Boulevard, flying cold and sharp and homing in on my target and/—

I opened my eyes again. The water was just water.

But what was I?

I shook my head violently. Steady, old boy; no Dexter off the deep end,
please. I took a long breath and peeked at myself. In the mirror I
looked the way I was supposed to look. Carefully composed features. Calm
and mocking blue eyes, a perfect imitation of human life. Except that my
hair stuck up like Stan Laurel's, there was no sign of whatever it was
that had just zipped through my half-sleeping brain and rattled me out
of my slumber.

I carefully closed my eyes again.

Darkness.

Plain, simple, darkness. No flying, no blood, no city lights. Just good
old Dexter with his eyes closed in front of the mirror.

I opened them again. Hello, dear boy, so good to have you back. But
where on earth have you been?

That, of course, was the question. I have spent most of my life
untroubled by dreams and, for that matter, hallucinations. No visions of
the Apocalypse for me; no troubling Jungian icons burbling up from my
subconscious, no mysterious recurring images drifting through the
history of my unconsciousness. Nothing ever goes bump in Dexter's night.
When I go to sleep, all of me sleeps.

So what had just happened? Why were these pictures appearing to me?

I splashed water on my face and pushed my hair down. That did not, of
course, answer the question, but it made me feel a little better. How
bad could things be if my hair was neat?

In truth, I did not know. Things could be plenty bad. I might be losing
all, or many, of my marbles. What if I had been slipping into insanity a
piece at a time for years, and this new killer had simply triggered the
final headlong fall into complete craziness? How could I hope to measure
the relative sanity of somebody like me?

The images had looked and felt so real. But they couldn't be; I had been
right here in my bed. Yet I had almost been able to smell the tang of
salt water, exhaust, and cheap perfume floating over Biscayne Boulevard.
Completely real—and wasn't that one of the signs of insanity, that the
delusions were indistinguishable from reality? I had no answers, and no
way to find any. Talking to a shrink was out of the question, of course;
I would frighten the poor thing to death, and he might feel honor bound
to have me locked away somewhere. Certainly I could not argue with the
wisdom of that idea. But if I was losing my hold on sanity as I had
built it, it was all my problem, and the first part of the problem was
that there was no way to know for sure.

Although, come to think of it, there was one way.

Ten minutes later I was driving past Dinner Key. I drove slowly, since I
didn't actually know what I was looking for. This part of the city
slept, as much as it ever did. A few people still swirled across the
Miami landscape: tourists who'd had too much Cuban coffee and couldn't
sleep. People from Iowa looking for a gas station. Foreigners looking
for South Beach. And the predators, of course—thugs, robbers,
crackheads; vampires, ghouls, and assorted monsters like me. But in this
area, at this time, very few of them altogether. This was Miami
deserted, as deserted as it got, a place made lonely by the ghost of the
daytime crowd. It was a city that had whittled itself down to a mere
hunting ground, without the gaudy disguises of sunlight and bright T-shirts.

And so I hunted. The other night eyes tracked me and dismissed me as I
passed without slowing. I drove north, over the old drawbridge, through
downtown Miami, still not sure what I was looking for and still not
seeing it—and yet, for some uncomfortable reason, absolutely sure that I
would find it, that I was going in the right direction, that /it/ was
waiting for me ahead.

Just beyond the Omni the nightlife picked up. More activity, more things
to see. Whooping on the sidewalks, tinny music coming and going through
the car windows. The night girls came out, flocks of them on the street
corners, giggling with each other, or staring stupidly at the passing
cars. And the cars slowed to stare back, gawking at the costumes and
what they left uncovered. Two blocks ahead of me a new Corniche stopped
and a pack of the girls flew out of the shadows, off the sidewalk, and
into the street, surrounding the car immediately. Traffic stumbled to a
half stop, horns blattered. Most of the drivers sat for a minute,
content to watch, but an impatient truck pulled around the knot of cars
and into the oncoming lane.

A refrigerator truck.

This was nothing, I said to myself. Nighttime yogurt delivery; pork link
sausages for breakfast, freshness guaranteed. A load of grouper headed
north or to the airport. Refrigerated trucks moved through Miami around
the clock, even now, even in the night hours— This it was and nothing more.

But I put my foot down on the gas pedal anyway. I moved up, in and out
of traffic. I got within three cars of the Corniche and its besieged
driver. Traffic stopped. I looked ahead at the truck. It was running
straight up Biscayne, moving into a series of traffic lights. I would
lose him if I got too far behind. And I suddenly wanted very badly not
to lose him.

I waited for a gap in traffic and quickly nosed out into the oncoming
lane. I was around the Corniche and then speeding up, closing on the
truck. Trying not to move too fast, not to be conspicuous, but slowly
closing the space between us. He was three traffic lights ahead, then two.

Then his light turned red and before I could gloat and catch up, mine
did, too. I stopped. I realized with some surprise that I was chewing on
my lip. I was tense; me, Dexter the Ice Cube. I was feeling human
anxiety, desperation, actual emotional distress. I wanted to catch up to
this truck and see for myself, oh how I wanted to put my hand on the
truck, open the door to the cabin, look inside—

And then what? Arrest him single-handed? Take him by the hand to dear
Detective LaGuerta? See what I caught? Can I keep him? It was just as
likely that he would keep me. He was in full hunting mode, and I was
merely tagging along behind like an unwanted little brother. And why was
I tagging along? Did I just want to prove to myself that it was him,
/the/ him, that he was out here prowling and I was not crazy? And if I
was not crazy—how had I known? What was going on in my brain? Perhaps
crazy would be a happier solution after all.

An old man shuffled in front of my car, crossing the street with
incredibly slow and painful steps. For a moment I watched him, marveling
at what life must be like when you moved that slow, and then I glanced
ahead at the refrigerator truck.

His light had turned green. Mine had not.

The truck accelerated quickly, moving north at the upper end of the
speed limit, taillights growing smaller as I watched, waiting for my
light to change.

Which it refused to do. And so grinding my teeth—steady, Dex!—I ran the
light, narrowly missing the old man. He didn't look up or break step.

The speed limit on this stretch of Biscayne Boulevard was thirty-five.
In Miami that means if you go under fifty they will run you off the
road. I pushed up to sixty-five, moving through the sparse traffic,
desperate now to close the distance. The lights of the truck winked out
as he went around a curve—or had he turned? I moved up to seventy-five
and roared past the turn for the 79th Street Causeway, around the bend
by the Publix Market, and into the straightaway, searching frantically
for the truck.

And saw it. There—ahead of me—

Moving /toward/ me.

The bastard had doubled back. Did he feel me on his tail? Smell my
exhaust drifting up on him? No matter—it was him, the same truck, no
question, and as I raced past him he turned out onto the causeway.

I squealed into a mall parking lot and slowed, turning the car and
accelerating back out onto Biscayne Boulevard, southbound now. Less than
a block and I turned onto the causeway, too. Far, far in front, nearly
to the first bridge, I saw the small red lights, winking, mocking me. My
foot crashed down on the gas pedal and I charged ahead.

He was on the up-slope of the bridge now, picking up speed, keeping the
distance steady between us. Which meant he must know, must realize
somebody was following. I pushed my car a little harder; I got closer,
little by little, a few lengths closer.

And then he was gone, over the hump at the top of the bridge and down
the far side, heading much too fast into North Bay Village. It was a
heavily patrolled area. If he went too fast he would be seen and pulled
over. And then—

I was up the bridge and onto the hump now and below me—

Nothing.

Empty road.

I slowed, looking in all directions from the vantage point at the top of
the bridge. A car moved toward me—not the truck, just a Mercury Marquis
with one smashed fender. I started down the far side of the bridge.

At the bottom of the bridge North Bay Village split off the causeway
into two residential areas. Behind a gas station on the left a row of
condos and apartments made a slow circle. To the right were houses;
small but expensive. Nothing moved on either side. There were no lights
showing, no sign of anything, neither traffic nor life.

Slowly I moved through the village. Empty. He was gone. On an island
with only one through street, he had lost me. But how?

I circled back, pulled off onto the shoulder of the road and closed my
eyes. I don't know why; perhaps I hoped I might /see/ something again.
But I didn't. Just darkness, and little bright lights dancing on the
inside of my eyelids. I was tired. I felt stupid. Yes, me; ditzy Dexter,
trying to be Boy Wonder, using my great psychic powers to track down the
evil genius. Pursuing him in my supercharged crime-fighting vehicle. And
in all likelihood he was simply a stoked-up delivery boy playing macho
head games with the only other driver on the road that night. A Miami
thing that happened every day to every driver in our fair city. Chase
me, you can't catch me. Then the uplifted finger, the waved gun, ho-hum
and back to work.

Just a refrigerated truck, nothing more, now speeding away across Miami
Beach with the heavy metal station ripping from the radio speaker. And
not my killer, not some mysterious bond pulling me out of bed and across
the city in the dead of night. Because that was just too silly for
words, and far too silly for level-headed empty-hearted Dexter.

I let my head drop onto the steering wheel. How wonderful to have such
an authentic /human/ experience. Now I knew what it was like to feel
like a total idiot. I could hear the bell on the drawbridge in the near
distance, clanging its warning that the bridge was about to go up. Ding
ding ding. The alarm bell on my expired intellect. I yawned. Time to go
home, go back to bed.

Behind me an engine started. I glanced back.

From behind the gas station at the foot of the bridge he came out fast
in a tight circle. He passed me fishtailing and still accelerating and
through the blur of motion in the driver's window a shape spun at me,
wild and hard. I ducked. Something thumped into the side of my car,
leaving behind it the sound of an expensive dent. I waited for a moment,
just to be safe. Then I raised my head and looked. The truck was
speeding away, crashing the wooden barrier at the drawbridge and
powering through, leaping across the bridge as it started to raise up,
and making it easily to the other side as the bridge keeper leaned out
and yelled. Then the truck was gone, down the far side of the bridge and
back into Miami, far away on the other side of the widening gap as the
bridge went up. Gone, hopelessly gone, gone as if he had never been. And
I would never know if it had been my killer or just another normal Miami
jerk.

I got out of my car to look at the dent. It was a big one. I looked
around to see what he had thrown.

It had rolled ten or fifteen feet away and wobbled out into the middle
of the street. Even from this distance there was no mistaking it, but
just to make sure I was absolutely without any doubt, the headlights
from an oncoming car lit it up. The car swerved and smashed into a hedge
and over the sound of its now-constant horn I could hear the driver
screaming. I walked over to the thing to be sure.

Yes indeed. That's what it was.

A woman's head.

I bent to look. It was a very clean cut, very nice work. There was
almost no blood around the lip of the wound.

“Thank God,” I said, and I realized I was smiling—and why not?

Wasn't it nice? I wasn't crazy after all.

CHAPTER 10

AT A LITTLE AFTER 8 AM LAGUERTA CAME OVER TO where I was sitting on
the trunk of my car. She leaned her tailored haunch onto the car and
slid over until our thighs were touching. I waited for her to say
something, but she didn't seem to have any words for the occasion.
Neither did I. So I sat there for several minutes looking back at the
bridge, feeling the heat of her leg against mine and wondering where my
shy friend had gone with his truck. But I was yanked out of my quiet
daydream by a pressure on my thigh.

I looked down at my pants leg. LaGuerta was kneading my thigh as if it
were a lump of dough. I looked up at her face. She looked back.

“They found the body,” she said. “You know. The rest of it that goes
with the head.”

I stood up. “Where?”

She looked at me the way a cop looks at somebody who finds corpseless
heads in the street. But she answered. “Office Depot Center,” she said.

“Where the Panthers play?” I asked, and a little icy-fingered jolt ran
through me. “On the ice?”

LaGuerta nodded, still watching me. “The hockey team,” she said. “Is
that the Panthers?”

“I think that's what they're called,” I said. I couldn't help myself.

She pursed her lips. “They found it stuffed into the goalie's net.”

“Visitor's or home?” I asked.

She blinked. “Does that make a difference?”

I shook my head. “Just a joke, Detective.”

“Because I don't know how to tell the difference. I should get somebody
there who knows about hockey,” she said, her eyes finally drifting away
from me and across the crowd, searching for somebody carrying a puck.
“I'm glad you can make a joke about it,” she added. “What's a—” she
frowned, trying to remember, “—a sam-bolie?”

“A what?”

She shrugged. “Some kind of machine. They use it on the ice?”

“A Zamboni?”

“Whatever. The guy who drives it, he takes it out on the ice to get
ready for practice this morning. A couple of the players, they like to
get there early? And they like the ice fresh, so this guy, the—” she
hesitated slightly “—the sambolie driver? He comes in early on practice
days. And so he drives this thing out onto the ice? And he sees these
packages stacked up. Down there in the goalie's net? So he gets down and
he takes a look.” She shrugged again. “Doakes is over there now. He says
they can't get the guy to calm down enough to say any more than that.”

“I know a little about hockey,” I said.

She looked at me again with somewhat heavy eyes. “So much I don't know
about you, Dexter. You play hockey?”

“No, I never played,” I said modestly. “I went to a few games.” She
didn't say anything and I had to bite my lip to keep from blathering on.
In truth, Rita had season tickets for the Florida Panthers, and I had
found to my very great surprise that I liked hockey. It was not merely
the frantic, cheerfully homicidal mayhem I enjoyed. There was something
about sitting in the huge, cool hall that I found relaxing, and I would
happily have gone there even to watch golf. In truth, I would have said
anything to make LaGuerta take me to the rink. I wanted to go to the
arena very badly. I wanted to see this body stacked in the net on the
ice more than anything else I could think of, wanted to undo the neat
wrapping and see the clean dry flesh. I wanted to see it so much that I
felt like a cartoon of a dog on point, wanted to be there with it so
much that I felt self-righteous and possessive about the body.

“All right,” LaGuerta finally said, when I was about to vibrate out of
my skin. And she showed a small, strange smile that was part official
and part—what? Something else altogether, something human,
unfortunately, putting it beyond my understanding. “Give us a chance to
talk.”

“I'd like that very much,” I said, absolutely oozing charm. LaGuerta
didn't respond. Maybe she didn't hear me, not that it mattered. She was
totally beyond any sense of sarcasm where her self-image was concerned.
It was possible to hit her with the most horrible flattery in the world
and she would accept it as her due. I didn't really enjoy flattering
her. There's no fun where there's no challenge. But I didn't know what
else to say. What did she imagine we would talk about? She had already
grilled me mercilessly when she first arrived on the scene.

We had stood beside my poor dented car and watched the sun come up. She
had looked out across the causeway and asked me seven times if I had
seen the driver of the truck, each time with a slightly different
inflection, frowning in between questions. She'd asked me five times if
I was sure it had been a refrigerated truck—I'm sure that was subtlety
on her part. She wanted to ask about that one a lot more, but held back
to avoid being obvious. She even forgot herself once and asked in
Spanish. I told her I was /seguro/, and she had looked at me and touched
my arm, but she did not ask again.

And three times she had looked up the incline of the bridge, shaken her
head, and spat “Puta!” under her breath. Clearly, that was a reference
to Officer Puta, my dear sister Deborah. In the face of an actual
refrigerator truck as predicted by Deborah, a certain amount of spin
control was going to be necessary, and I could tell by the way LaGuerta
nibbled at her lower lip that she was hard at work on the problem. I was
quite sure she would come up with something uncomfortable for Deb—it was
what she did best—but for the time being I was hoping for a modest rise
in my sister's stock. Not with LaGuerta, of course, but one could hope
that others might notice that her brilliant bit of attempted detective
work had panned out.

Oddly enough, LaGuerta did not ask me what I had been doing driving
around at that hour. Of course, I'm not a detective, but it did seem
like a rather obvious question. Perhaps it would be unkind to say that
the oversight was typical of her, but there it is. She just didn't ask.

And yet there was more for us to talk about, apparently. So I followed
her to her car, a big two-year-old light blue Chevrolet that she drove
on duty. After hours she had a little BMW that nobody was supposed to
know about.

“Get in,” she said. And I climbed into the neat blue front seat.

LaGuerta drove fast, in and out of traffic, and in a very few minutes we
were over the causeway to the Miami side again, across Biscayne and a
half mile or so to I-95. She drove onto the freeway and wove north
through traffic at speeds that seemed a little much even for Miami. But
we got to 595 and turned west. She looked at me sideways, out of the
corner of her eye, three times before she finally spoke. “That's a nice
shirt,” she said.

I glanced down at my nice shirt. I had thrown it on to chase out of my
apartment and saw it now for the first time, a polyester bowling shirt
with bright red dragons on it. I had worn it all day at work and it was
a trifle ripe, but yes, more or less clean looking. Somewhat nice, of
course, but still—

Was LaGuerta making small talk so I would relax enough to make some
damaging admission? Did she suspect that I knew more than I was saying
and think she could get me to drop my guard and say it?

“You always wear such nice clothes, Dexter,” she said. She looked over
at me with a huge, goofy smile, unaware that she was about to ram her
car into a tanker truck. She looked back in time and turned the wheel
with one finger and we slid around the tanker and west on I-595.

I thought about the nice clothes that I always wore. Well of course I
did. I took pride in being the best-dressed monster in Dade County. Yes,
certainly, he chopped up that nice Mr. Duarte, but he was so well
dressed! Proper clothing for all occasions—by the way, what did one wear
to attend an early-morning decapitation? A day-old bowling shirt and
slacks, naturally. I was /à la mode/. But aside from this morning's
hasty costume, I really was careful. It was one of Harry's lessons: stay
neat, dress nicely, avoid attention.

But why should a politically minded homicide detective either notice or
care? It was not as if—

Or was it? A nasty little idea began to grow. Something in the strange
smile that flicked across her face and then away gave me the answer. It
was ridiculous, but what else could it be? LaGuerta was not looking for
a way to put me off my guard and ask more penetrating questions about
what I had seen. And she did not truly give a winged fart about my
hockey expertise.

LaGuerta was being social.

She /liked/ me.

Here I was still trying to recover from the horrible shock of my
bizarre, lurching, slobbering attack on Rita—and now this? LaGuerta
/liked/ me? Had terrorists dumped something in the Miami water supply?
Was I exuding some kind of strange pheromone? Had every woman in Miami
suddenly realized how hopeless real men are, and I had become attractive
by default? What, in all very seriousness, the hell was going on?

Of course I could be wrong. I lunged at the thought like a barracuda at
a shiny silver spoon. After all, what colossal egotism to think that a
polished, sophisticated, career-track woman like LaGuerta might show any
kind of interest in me. Wasn't it more likely that, that—

That what? As unfortunate as it was, it did make a kind of sense. We
were in the same line of work and therefore, conventional cop wisdom
said, more likely to understand and forgive each other. Our relationship
could survive her cop hours and stressful lifestyle. And although I take
no credit for it, I am presentable enough; I clean up good, as we
natives like to say. And I had put myself out to be charming to her for
several years now. It had been purely political schmoozing, but she did
not have to know that. I was /good/ at being charming, one of my very
few vanities. I had studied hard and practiced long, and when I applied
myself no one could tell I was faking it. I was really very good at
sprinkling seeds of charm. Perhaps it was natural that the seeds would
eventually sprout.

But sprout into this? What now? Was she going to propose a quiet dinner
some evening? Or a few hours of sweaty bliss at the Cacique Motel?

Happily, we arrived at the arena just before panic took me over
completely. LaGuerta circled the building once, looking for the correct
entrance. It wasn't too hard to find. A cluster of police cars stood
scattered outside one row of double doors. She nosed her big car in
among them. I jumped out of the car quickly, before she could put her
hand on my knee. She got out and looked at me for a moment. Her mouth
twitched.

“I'll take a look,” I said. I did not quite run into the arena. I was
fleeing LaGuerta, yes—but I was also very anxious to get inside; to see
what my playful friend had done, to be near his work, to inhale the
wonder, to learn.

The inside echoed with the organized bedlam typical of any murder
scene—and yet it seemed to me that there was a special electricity in
the air, a slightly hushed feeling of excitement and tension that you
wouldn't find at any ordinary murder, a sense that this one was
different somehow, that new and wonderful things might happen because we
were out here on the cutting edge. But maybe that was just me. A clot of
people stood around the nearby net. Several of them wore Broward
uniforms; they had their arms folded and watched as Captain Matthews
argued about jurisdiction with a man in a tailored suit. As I got closer
I saw Angel-no-relation in an unusual position, standing above a balding
man who was on one knee poking at a stack of carefully wrapped packages.

I stopped at the railing to look through the glass. There it was, only
ten feet away. It looked so perfect in the cold purity of the newly
Zambonied hockey rink. Any jeweler will tell you that finding the right
setting is vitally important, and this— It was stunning. Absolutely
perfect. I felt just a little dizzy, uncertain of whether the railing
would hold my weight, as if I might simply pass straight down through
the hard wood like a mist.

Even from the railing I could tell. He had taken the time, he had done
it right, in spite of what must have seemed like a very close call on
the causeway only minutes before. Or had he known somehow that I meant
him no harm?

And since I brought it up anyway, did I, in fact, mean him no harm? Did
I truly mean to track him to his lair and come up on point all aquiver
for advancing Deborah's career? Of course that was what I thought I was
doing—but would I be strong enough to carry through with it if things
kept getting so interesting? Here we were at the hockey rink where I had
whiled away many pleasant and contemplative hours; wasn't this even more
proof that this artist—excuse me, I mean “killer” of course—was moving
on a track parallel to mine? Just look at the lovely work he had done here.

And the head—that was the key. Surely it was too important as a piece of
what he was doing simply to leave it behind. Had he thrown it to
frighten me, send me into paroxysms of terror, horror, and dread? Or had
he known somehow that I felt the same way he did? Could he, too, feel
the connection between us, and he just wanted to be playful? Was he
teasing me? He had to have some important reason for leaving me such a
trophy. I was experiencing powerful, dizzying sensations—how could he be
feeling nothing?

LaGuerta came up beside me. “You're in such a hurry,” she said, a slight
edge of complaint in her voice. “Are you afraid she'll get away?” She
nodded at the stacked body parts.

I knew that somewhere inside me was a clever answer, something that
would make her smile, charm her a little more, smooth over my awkward
run from her clutches. But standing there at the rail, looking down at
the body on the ice, in the goalie's net—in the presence of greatness,
one might say—no wit came out. I did manage not to yell at her to shut
up, but it was a very near thing.

“I had to see,” I said truthfully, and then recovered enough to add,
“It's the home team's net.”

She slapped my arm playfully. “You're awful,” she said. Luckily Sergeant
Doakes came over to us and the detective didn't have time for a
kittenish giggle, which would have been more than I could take. As
always, Doakes seemed more interested in finding a way to get a good
grip on my ribs and pull me open than anything else, and he gave me such
a warm and penetrating look of welcome that I faded quickly away and
left him to LaGuerta. He stared after me, watching me with an expression
that said I had to be guilty of something and he would very much like to
examine my entrails to find out what. I'm sure he would have been
happier someplace where the police were permitted to break the
occasional tibia or femur. I circled away from him, moving slowly around
the rink to the nearest place where I could get in. I had just found it
when something came at me on my blind side and hit me, rather hard, in
the ribs.

I straightened up to face my assailant with a certain bruise and a
strained smile. “Hello, dear sister,” I said. “So nice to see a friendly
face.”

“Bastard!” she hissed at me.

“Quite probably,” I said. “But why bring it up now?”

“Because, you miserable son of a bitch, you had a lead and you didn't
call me!”

“A lead?” I almost stuttered. “What makes you think—”

“Cut the crap, Dexter,” Deborah snarled. “You weren't driving around at
four AM looking for hookers. You knew where he was, goddamn it.”

Light dawned. I had been so wrapped up in my own problems, starting with
the dream—and the fact that it had obviously been something more than
that—and continuing on through my nightmarish encounter with LaGuerta,
that it did not occur to me that I had wronged Deborah. I had not
shared. Of course she would be angry. “Not a lead, Deb,” I said, trying
to soothe her feelings a bit. “Nothing solid like that. Just—a feeling.
A thought, that's all. It was really nothing—”

She shoved again. “Except that it was /something/,” she snarled. “You
found him.”

“Actually, I'm not sure,” I said. “I think he found me.”

“Quit being clever,” she said, and I spread my hands to show how
impossible that would be. “You promised, goddamn you.”

I did not remember making any kind of promise that might cover calling
her in the middle of the night and telling her my dreams, but this
didn't seem like a very politic thing to say, so I didn't. “I'm sorry,
Deb,” I said instead. “I really didn't think it would pan out. It was
just a . . . a hunch, really.” I was certainly not going to attempt any
explanation of the parapsychology involved, even with Deb. Or perhaps
especially not with her. But another thought hit me. I lowered my voice.
“Maybe you could help me a little. What am I supposed to tell them if
/they/ ever decide to ask what I was doing driving around down there at
four AM?”

“Has LaGuerta interviewed you yet?”

“Exhaustively,” I said, fighting down a shudder.

Deb made a disgusted face. “And she didn't ask.” It was not a question.

“I'm sure the detective has a great deal on her mind,” I said. I did not
add that apparently some of it was me. “But sooner or later, somebody
will ask.” I looked over to where she was Directing the Operation.
“Probably Sergeant Doakes,” I said with real dread.

She nodded. “He's a decent cop. If he could just lose some attitude.”

“Attitude may be all he is,” I said. “But he doesn't like me for some
reason. He'll ask anything if he thinks it will make me squirm.”

“So tell him the truth,” Deborah said deadpan. “But first, tell it to
me.” And she poked me again in the same spot.

“Please, Deb,” I said. “You know how easily I bruise.”

“I don't know,” she said. “But I feel like finding out.”

“It won't happen again,” I promised. “It was just one of those 3 AM
inspirations, Deborah. What would you have said if I had called you
about it, and then it turned out to be nothing?”

“But it didn't. It turned out to be something,” she said with another push.

“I really didn't think it would. And I would have felt stupid dragging
you in on it.”

“Imagine how I would have felt if he had killed you,” she said.

It took me by surprise. I couldn't even begin to imagine how she would
have felt. Regret? Disappointment? Anger? That sort of thing is way
beyond me, I'm afraid. So I just repeated, “I'm sorry, Deb.” And then,
because I am the kind of cheerful Pollyanna who always finds the bright
side, I added, “But at least the refrigerated truck was there.”

She blinked at me. “The truck was where?” she said.

“Oh, Deb,” I said. “They didn't tell you?”

She hit me even harder in the same place. “Goddamn it, Dexter,” she
hissed. “What about the truck?”

“It was there, Deb,” I said, somewhat embarrassed by her nakedly
emotional reaction—and also, of course, by the fact that a good-looking
woman was beating the crap out of me. “He was driving a refrigerated
truck. When he threw the head.”

She grabbed my arms and stared at me. “The fuck you say,” she finally said.

“The fuck I do.”

“Jesus—!” she said, staring off into space and no doubt seeing her
promotion floating there somewhere above my head. And she was probably
going to go on but at that moment Angel-no-relation lifted his voice
over the echoing din of the arena. “Detective?” he called, looking over
at LaGuerta. It was a strange, unconscious sound, the half-strangled cry
of a man who never makes loud noises in public, and something about it
brought instant quiet to the room. The tone was part shock and part
triumph—I found something important but oh-my-God. All eyes turned to
Angel and he nodded down at the crouching bald man who was slowly,
carefully, removing something from the top package.

The man finally pulled the thing out, fumbled, and dropped it, and it
skittered across the ice. He reached for it and slipped, sliding after
the brightly gleaming thing from the package until they both came to
rest against the boards. Hand shaking, Angel grabbed for it, got it and
held it up for all of us to see. The sudden quiet in the building was
awe inspiring, breathtaking, beautiful, like the overwhelming crash of
applause at the unveiling of any work of genius.

It was the rearview mirror from the truck.

CHAPTER 11

THE GREAT BLANKET OF STUNNED SILENCE LASTED for only a moment. Then
the buzz of talk in the arena took on a new note as people strained to
see, to explain, to speculate.

A mirror. What the hell did it mean?

Good question. In spite of feeling so very moved by the thing, I didn't
have any immediate theories about what it meant. Sometimes great art is
like that. It affects you and you can't say why. Was it deep symbolism?
A cryptic message? A wrenching plea for help and understanding?
Impossible to say, and to me, not the most important thing at first. I
just wanted to breathe it in. Let others worry about how it had gotten
there. After all, maybe it had just fallen off and he had decided to
throw it away in the nearest handy garbage bag.

Not possible, of course not. And now I couldn't help thinking about it.
The mirror was there for some very important reason. These were not
garbage bags to him. As he had now proved so elegantly with this
hockey-rink setting, presentation was an important part of what he was
doing. He would not be casual in any detail. And because of that, I
began to think about what the mirror might mean. I had to believe that,
as improvised as it might be, putting it in with the body parts was
exceedingly deliberate. And I had the further feeling, burbling up from
somewhere behind my lungs, that this was a very careful, very private
message.

To me?

If not me, then whom? The rest of the act was speaking to the world at
large: See what I am. See what we all are. See what I am doing about it.
A truck's mirror wasn't part of the statement. Segmenting the body,
draining the blood—this was necessary and elegant. But the mirror—and
especially if it turned out to be from the truck that I had chased—that
was different. Elegant, yes; but what did it say about the way things
really are? Nothing. It was added on for some other purpose, and that
purpose had to be a new and different kind of statement. I could feel
the electricity of the thought surging through me. If it was from that
truck, it could only be meant for me.

But what did it mean?

“What the hell is that about?” Deb said beside me. “A mirror. Why?”

“I don't know,” I said, still feeling its power throb through me. “But I
will bet you dinner at Joe's Stone Crabs that it came from the
refrigerator truck.”

“No bet,” she said. “But at least it settles one important question.”

I looked at her, startled. Could she really have made some intuitive
jump that I had missed? “What question, sis?”

She nodded at the cluster of management-level cops still squabbling at
the edges of the rink. “Jurisdiction. This one is ours. Come on.”

On the surface, Detective LaGuerta was not impressed with this new piece
of evidence. Perhaps she was hiding a deep and abiding concern for the
symbolism of the mirror and all it implied under a carefully crafted
façade of indifference. Either that or she really was dumb as a box of
rocks. She was still standing with Doakes. To his credit, he looked
troubled, but maybe his face had simply gotten tired from its perpetual
mean glare and he was trying something new.

“Morgan,” LaGuerta said to Deb, “I didn't recognize you with clothes on.”

“I guess it's possible to miss a lot of obvious things, Detective,” Deb
said before I could stop her.

“It is,” LaGuerta said. “That's why some of us never make detective.” It
was a complete and effortless victory, and LaGuerta didn't even wait to
see the shot go home. She turned away from Deb and spoke to Doakes.
“Find out who has keys to the arena. Who could get in here whenever they
wanted.”

“Uh-huh,” said Doakes. “Check all the locks, see if somebody busted in?”

“No,” LaGuerta told him with a pretty little frown. “We got our ice
connection now.” She glanced at Deborah. “That refrigerated truck is
just to confuse us.” Back to Doakes. “The tissue damage had to come from
the ice, from here. So the killer is connected to the ice in this
place.” She looked one last time at Deborah. “Not the truck.”

“Uh-huh,” said Doakes. He didn't sound convinced, but he wasn't in charge.

LaGuerta looked over at me. “I think you can go home, Dexter,” she said.
“I know where you live when I need you.” At least she didn't wink.

Deborah walked me to the big double doors of the arena. “If this keeps
up, I'll be a crossing guard in a year,” she grumbled at me.

“Nonsense, Deb,” I said. “Two months, max.”

“Thanks.”

“Well really. You can't challenge her /openly/ like that. Didn't you see
how Sergeant Doakes did it? Have some subtlety, for God's sake.”

“Subtlety.” She stopped dead in her tracks and grabbed me. “Listen,
Dexter,” she said. “This isn't some kind of game here.”

“But it is, Deb. A political game. And you're not playing it properly.”

“I'm not playing anything,” she snarled. “There are human lives at
stake. There's a butcher running loose, and he's going to stay loose as
long as that half-wit LaGuerta is running things.”

I fought down a surge of hope. “That may be so—”

“It /is/ so,” Deb insisted.

“—but Deborah, you can't change that by getting yourself exiled to
Coconut Grove traffic duty.”

“No,” she said. “But I can change it by finding the killer.”

Well there it was. Some people just have no idea how the world works.
She was otherwise a very smart person, truly she was. She had simply
inherited all of Harry's earthy directness, his straightforward way of
dealing with things, without latching on to any of his accompanying
wisdom. With Harry, bluntness had been a way to cut through the fecal
matter. With Deborah, it was a way of pretending there wasn't any.

I got a ride back to my car with one of the patrol units outside the
arena. I drove home, imagining I had kept the head, wrapped it carefully
in tissue paper, and placed it in the backseat to take home with me.
Terrible and silly, I know. For the first time I understood those sad
men, usually Shriners, who fondle women's shoes or carry around dirty
underwear. An awful feeling that made me want a shower almost as much as
I wanted to stroke the head.

But I didn't have it. Nothing for it but to go home. I drove slowly, a
few miles per hour under the speed limit. In Miami that's like wearing a
KICK ME sign on your back. No one actually kicked me, of course. They
would have had to slow down for that. But I was honked at seven times,
flipped off eight, and five cars simply roared around me, either onto
the sidewalk or through oncoming traffic.

But today even the energetic high spirits of the other drivers couldn't
cheer me. I was dead tired and bemused and I needed to think, away from
the echoing din of the arena and the bonehead blather of LaGuerta.
Driving slowly gave me time to wonder, to work through the meaning of
all that had happened. And I found that one silly phrase kept ringing in
my head, bouncing off the rocks and crannies of my exhausted brain. It
took on a life of its own. The more I heard it in my thoughts, the more
sense it made. And beyond sense, it became a kind of seductive mantra.
It became the key to thinking about the killer, the head rolling into
the street, the rearview mirror tucked away amid the wonderfully dry
body parts.

/If it had been me/—

As in, “If it had been me, what would I be saying with the mirror?” and
“If it had been me, what would I have done with the truck?”

Of course it had not been me, and that kind of envy is very bad for the
soul, but since I was not aware of having one it didn't matter. If it
/had/ been me, the truck would be run into a ditch somewhere not too far
from the arena. And then I would get far away from there fast—in a
stashed car? A stolen one? It would depend. If it had been me, would I
have planned on leaving the body at the arena all along, or had that
come up as a response to the chase on the causeway?

Except that made no sense. He could not have counted on anyone chasing
him out to North Bay Village—could he? But then why did he have the head
ready to throw? And then why take the rest to the arena? It seemed like
an odd choice. Yes, there was a great deal of ice there, and the
coldness was all to the good. But the vast clattery space was really not
appropriate for my kind of intimate moment—if it had been me. There was
a terrible, wide-open desolation that was not at all conducive to real
creativity. Fun to visit, but not a real artist's studio. A dumping
ground, and not a work space. It just didn't have the proper feeling to it.

If it had been me, that is.

So the arena was a bold stroke into unexplored territory. It would give
the police fits, and it would most definitely lead them in the wrong
direction. If they ever figured out that there was a direction to be led
in, which seemed increasingly unlikely.

And to top it off with the mirror—if I was right about the reasons for
selecting the arena, then the addition of the mirror would of course
support that. It would be a comment on what had just happened, connected
to leaving the head. It would be a statement that would bring together
all the other threads, wrap them up as neatly as the stacked body parts,
an elegant underlining to a major work. Now what would the statement be,
if it was me?

/I see you./

Well. Of course that was it, in spite of being somewhat obvious. I see
you. I know you're behind me, and I am watching you. But I am far ahead
of you, too, controlling your course and setting your speed and watching
you follow me. I see you. I know who you are and where you are, and all
you know about me is that I am watching. I see you.

That felt right. Why didn't it make me feel better?

Further, how much of this should I tell poor dear Deborah? This was
becoming so intensely personal that it was a struggle to remember that
there was a public side to it, a side that was important to my sister
and her career. I could not begin to tell her—or anyone—that I thought
the killer was trying to tell me something, if I had the wit to hear and
reply. But the rest—was there something I needed to tell her, and did I
actually want to?

It was too much. I needed sleep before I could sort all this out.

I did not quite whimper as I crawled into my bed, but it was a very near
thing. I allowed sleep to roll over me quickly, just letting go into the
darkness. And I got nearly two and a half full hours of sleep before the
telephone rang.

“It's me,” said the voice on the other end.

“Of course it is,” I said. “Deborah, wasn't it?” And of course it was.

“I found the refrigerated truck.”

“Well, congratulations, Deb. That's very good news.”

There was a rather long silence on the other end.

“Deb?” I said finally. “That is good news, isn't it?”

“No,” she said.

“Oh.” I felt the need for sleep thumping my head like carpet beaters on
a prayer rug, but I tried to concentrate. “Um, Deb—what did you . . .
what happened?”

“I made the match,” she said. “Made absolutely certain. Pictures and
part numbers and everything. So I told LaGuerta like a good scout.”

“And she didn't believe you?” I asked incredulously.

“She probably did.”

I tried to blink, but my eyes wanted to stick shut so I gave it up. “I'm
sorry, Deb, one of us isn't making much sense. Is it me?”

“I tried to explain it to her,” Deborah said in a very small, very tired
voice that gave me a terrible feeling of sinking under the waves without
a bailing bucket. “I gave her the whole thing. I was even polite.”

“That's very good,” I said. “What did she say?”

“Nothing,” Deb said.

“Nothing at all?”

“Nothing at all,” Deb repeated. “Except she just says thanks, in a kind
of way like you'd say it to the valet parking attendant. And she gives
me this funny little smile and turns away.”

“Well, but Deb,” I said, “you can't really expect her to—”

“And then I found out why she smiled like that,” Deb said. “Like I'm
some kind of unwashed half-wit and she's finally figured out where to
lock me up.”

“Oh, no,” I said. “You mean you're off the case?”

“We're all off the case, Dexter,” Deb said, her voice as tired as I
felt. “LaGuerta's made an arrest.”

There was far too much silence on the line all of a sudden and I
couldn't think at all, but at least I was wide awake. “What?” I said.

“LaGuerta has arrested somebody. Some guy who works at the arena. She
has him in custody and she's sure he's the killer.”

“That's not possible,” I said, although I knew it was possible, the
brain-dead bitch. LaGuerta, not Deb.

“I know that, Dexter. But don't try to tell LaGuerta. She's sure she got
the right guy.”

“How sure?” I asked. My head was spinning and I felt a little bit like
throwing up. I couldn't really say why.

Deb snorted. “She has a press conference in one hour,” she said. “For
her, that's positive.”

The pounding in my head got too loud to hear what Deb might have said
next. LaGuerta had made an arrest? Who? Who could she possibly have
tagged for it? Could she truly ignore all the clues, the smell and feel
and taste of these kills, and arrest somebody? Because nobody who could
do what this killer had done—was doing!—could possibly allow a pimple
like LaGuerta to catch him. Never. I would bet my life on it.

“No, Deborah,” I said. “No. Not possible. She's got the wrong guy.”

Deborah laughed, a tired, dirty-up-to-here cop's laugh. “Yeah,” she
said. “I know it. You know it. But she doesn't know it. And you want to
know something funny? Neither does he.”

That made no sense at all. “What are you saying, Deb? Who doesn't know?”

She repeated that awful little laugh. “The guy she arrested. I guess he
must be almost as confused as LaGuerta, Dex. Because he confessed.”

“What?”

“He confessed, Dexter. The bastard confessed.”

CHAPTER 12

HIS NAME WAS DARYLL EARL MCHALE AND HE WAS what we liked to call a
two-time loser. Twelve of his last twenty years had been spent as a
guest of the State of Florida. Dear Sergeant Doakes had managed to dig
his name out of the arena's personnel files. In a computer cross-check
for employees with a record of violence or felony convictions, McHale's
name had popped up twice.

Daryll Earl was a drunk and a wife beater. Apparently he occasionally
knocked over filling stations, too, just for the entertainment value. He
could be relied on to hold down a minimum wage job for a month or two.
But then some fine Friday night he'd throw back a few six-packs and
start to believe he was the Wrath of God. So he'd drive around until he
found a gas station that just pissed him off. He'd charge in waving a
weapon, take the money, and drive away. Then he'd use his massive $80 or
$90 haul to buy a few more six-packs until he felt so good he just had
to beat up on somebody. Daryll Earl was not a large man: five six and
scrawny. So to play it safe, the somebody he beat on usually turned out
to be his wife.

Things being what they were, he'd actually gotten away with it a couple
of times. But one night he went a little too far with his wife and put
her into traction for a month. She pressed charges, and since Daryll
Earl already had a record, he'd done some serious time.

He still drank, but he'd apparently been frightened enough at Raiford to
straighten out just a bit. He'd gotten a job as a janitor at the arena
and actually held on to it. As far as we could tell, he hadn't beaten up
his wife for ages.

And more, Our Boy had even had a few moments of fame when the Panthers
made their run at the Stanley Cup. Part of his job had been to run out
and clean up when the fans threw objects on the ice. That Stanley Cup
year, this had been a major job, since every time the Panthers scored
the fans threw three or four thousand plastic rats onto the rink. Daryll
Earl had to schlep out and pick them all up, boring work, no doubt. And
so encouraged by a few snorts of very cheap vodka one night, he'd picked
up one of the plastic rats and done a little “Rat Dance.” The crowd ate
it up and yelled for more. They began to call for it when Daryll Earl
skidded out onto the ice. Daryll Earl did the dance for the rest of the
season.

Plastic rats were forbidden nowadays. Even if they had been required by
federal statute, nobody would have been throwing them. The Panthers
hadn't scored a goal since the days when Miami had an honest mayor,
sometime in the last century. But McHale still showed up at the games
hoping for one last on-camera two-step.

At the press conference LaGuerta played that part beautifully. She made
it sound like the memory of his small fame had driven Daryll Earl over
the edge into murder. And of course with his drunkenness and his record
of violence toward women, he was the perfect suspect for this series of
stupid and brutal murders. But Miami's hookers could rest easy; the
killing was over. Driven by the overwhelming pressure of an intense and
merciless investigation, Daryll Earl had confessed. Case closed. Back to
work, girls.

The press ate it up. You couldn't really blame them, I suppose. LaGuerta
did a masterful job of presenting just enough fact colored with
high-gloss wishful thinking that nearly anyone would have been
convinced. And of course you don't actually have to take an IQ test to
become a reporter. Even so, I always hope for just the smallest glimmer.
And I'm always disappointed. Perhaps I saw too many black-and-white
movies as a child. I still thought the cynical, world-weary drunk from
the large metropolitan daily was supposed to ask an awkward question and
force the investigators to carefully reexamine the evidence.

But sadly, life does not always imitate art. And at LaGuerta's press
conference, the part of Spencer Tracy was played by a series of male and
female models with perfect hair and tropical-weight suits. Their
penetrating questions amounted to, “How did it feel to find the head?”
and “Can we have some pictures?”

One lone reporter, Nick Something from the local NBC TV affiliate, asked
LaGuerta if she was sure McHale was the killer. But when she said that
the overwhelming preponderance of evidence indicated that this was the
case and anyway the confession was conclusive, he let it go. Either he
was satisfied or the words were too big.

And so there it was. Case closed, justice done. The mighty machinery of
Metro Miami's awesome crime-fighting apparatus had once again triumphed
over the dark forces besieging Our Fair City. It was a lovely show.
LaGuerta handed out some very sinister-looking mug shots of Daryll Earl
stapled to those new glossy shots of herself investigating a
$250-an-hour high-fashion photographer on South Beach.

It made a wonderfully ironic package; the appearance of danger and the
lethal reality, so very different. Because however coarse and brutal
Daryll Earl looked, the real threat to society was LaGuerta. She had
called off the hounds, closed down the hue and cry, sent people back to
bed in a burning building.

Was I the only one who could see that Daryll Earl McHale could not
possibly be the killer? That there was a style and wit here that a
brickhead like McHale couldn't even understand?

I had never been more alone than I was in my admiration for the real
killer's work. The very body parts seemed to sing to me, a rhapsody of
bloodless wonder that lightened my heart and filled my veins with an
intoxicating sense of awe. But it was certainly not going to interfere
with my zeal in capturing the real killer, a cold and wanton executioner
of the innocent who absolutely must be brought to justice. Right,
Dexter? Right? Hello?

I sat in my apartment, rubbing my sleep-crusted eyes and thinking about
the show I had just watched. It had been as near perfect as a press
conference could be without free food and nudity. LaGuerta had clearly
pulled every string she had ever gotten a hand on in order to make it
the biggest, splashiest press conference possible, and it had been. And
for perhaps the first time in her Gucci-licking career, LaGuerta really
and truly believed she had the right man. She had to believe it. It was
kind of sad, really. She thought she had done everything right this
time. She wasn't just making political moves; in her mind she was
cashing in on a clean and well-lit piece of work. She'd solved the
crime, done it her way, caught the bad guy, stopped the killing.
Well-earned applause all around for a job well done. And what a lovely
surprise she would get when the next body turned up.

Because I knew with no room for doubt that the killer was still out
there. He was probably watching the press conference on Channel 7, the
channel of choice for people with an eye for carnage. At the moment he
would be laughing too hard to hold a blade, but that would pass. And
when it did his sense of humor would no doubt prompt him to comment on
the situation.

For some reason the thought did not overwhelm me with fear and loathing
and a grim determination to stop this madman before it was too late.
Instead I felt a little surge of anticipation. I knew it was very wrong,
and perhaps that made it feel even better. Oh, I wanted this killer
stopped, brought to justice, yes, certainly—but did it have to be soon?

There was also a small trade-off to make. If I was going to do my little
part to stop the real killer, then I should at least make something
positive happen at the same time. And as I thought it, my telephone rang.

“Yes, I saw it,” I said into the receiver.

“Jesus,” said Deborah on the other end. “I think I'm going to be sick.”

“Well, I won't mop your fevered brow, sis. There's work to be done.”

“Jesus,” she repeated. Then, “What work?”

“Tell me,” I asked her. “Are you in ill odor, sis?”

“I'm tired, Dexter. And I'm more pissed off than I've ever been in my
life. What's that in English?”

“I'm asking if you are in what Dad would have called the doghouse. Is
your name mud in the department? Has your professional reputation been
muddied, damaged, sullied, colored, rendered questionable?”

“Between LaGuerta's backstabbing and the Einstein thing? My professional
reputation is shit,” she said with more sourness than I would have
thought possible in someone so young.

“Good. It's important that you don't have anything to lose.”

She snorted. “Glad I could help. 'Cause I'm there, Dexter. If I sink any
lower in the department, I'll be making coffee for community relations.
Where is this going, Dex?”

I closed my eyes and leaned all the way back in my chair. “You are going
to go on record—with the captain and the department itself—as believing
that Daryll Earl is the wrong man and that another murder is going to
take place. You will present a couple of compelling reasons culled from
your investigation, and you will be the laughingstock of Miami Metro for
a little while.”

“I already am,” she said. “No big deal. But is there some reason for this?”

I shook my head. It was sometimes hard for me to believe she could be so
naïve. “Sister dearest,” I said, “you don't truly believe Daryll Earl is
guilty, do you?”

She didn't answer. I could hear her breathing and it occurred to me that
she must be tired, too, every bit as tired as I was, but without the
jolt of energy I got from being certain I was right. “Deb?”

“The guy confessed, Dexter,” she said at last, and I heard the utter
fatigue in her voice. “I don't—I've been wrong before, even when— I
mean, but he /confessed/. Doesn't that, that . . . Shit. Maybe we should
just let it go, Dex.”

“Oh ye of little faith,” I said. “She's got the wrong guy, Deborah. And
you are now going to rewrite the politics.”

“Sure I am.”

“Daryll Earl McHale is not it,” I said. “There's absolutely no doubt
about it.”

“Even if you're right, so what?” she said.

Now it was my turn to blink and wonder. “Excuse me?”

“Well, look, if I'm this killer, why don't I realize I'm off the hook
now? With this other guy arrested, the heat's off, you know. Why don't I
just stop? Or even take off for someplace else and start over?”

“Impossible,” I said. “You don't understand how this guy thinks.”

“Yeah, I know,” she said. “How come you do?”

I chose to ignore that. “He's going to stay right here and he's going to
kill again. He has to show us all what he thinks of us.”

“Which is what?”

“It's not good,” I admitted. “We've done something stupid by arresting
an obvious twinky like Daryll Earl. That's funny.”

“Ha, ha,” Deb said with no amusement.

“But we've also insulted him. We've given this lowbrow brain-dead
redneck all the credit for his work, which is like telling Jackson
Pollock your six-year-old could have painted that.”

“Jackson Pollock? The /painter/? Dexter, this guy's a butcher.”

“In his own way, Deborah, he is an artist. And he thinks of himself that
way.”

“For Christ's sake. That's the stupidest—”

“Trust me, Deb.”

“Sure, I trust you. Why shouldn't I trust you? So we have an angrily
amused artist who's not going anywhere, right?”

“Right,” I said. “He has to do it again, and it has to be under our
noses, and it probably has to be a little bigger.”

“You mean he's going to kill a fat hooker this time?”

“Bigger in scale, Deborah. Larger in concept. Splashier.”

“Oh. Splashier. Sure. Like with a mulcher.”

“The stakes have gone up, Debs. We've pushed him and insulted him a
little and the next kill will reflect that.”

“Uh-huh,” she said. “And how would that work?”

“I don't really know,” I admitted.

“But you're sure.”

“That's right,” I said.

“Swell,” she said. “Now I know what to watch for.”

CHAPTER 13

I KNEW WHEN I WALKED IN MY FRONT DOOR AFTER work on Monday that
something was wrong. Someone had been in my apartment.

The door was not broken, the windows were not jimmied, and I couldn't
see any signs of vandalism, but I knew. Call it sixth sense or whatever
you like. Someone had been here. Maybe I was smelling pheromones the
intruder had left in my air molecules. Or perhaps my La-Z-Boy recliner's
aura had been disturbed. It didn't matter how I knew: I knew. Somebody
had been in my apartment while I had been at work.

That might seem like no big deal. This was Miami, after all. People come
home every day to find their TVs gone, their jewelry and electronics all
taken away; their space violated, their possessions rifled, and their
dog pregnant. But this was different. Even as I did a quick search
through the apartment, I knew I would find nothing missing.

And I was right. Nothing was missing.

But something had been added.

It took me a few minutes to find it. I suppose some work-induced reflex
made me check the obvious things first. When an intruder has paid a
visit, in the natural course of events your things are gone: toys,
valuables, private relics, the last few chocolate chip cookies. So I
checked.

But all my things were unmolested. The computer, the sound system, the
TV and VCR—all right where I had left them. Even my small collection of
precious glass slides was tucked away on the bookcase, each with its
single drop of dried blood in place. Everything was exactly as I had
left it.

I checked the private areas next, just to be sure: bedroom, bathroom,
medicine cabinet. There were all fine, too, all apparently undisturbed,
and yet there was a feeling suspended in the air over every object that
it had been examined, touched, and replaced—with such perfect care that
even the dust motes were in their proper positions.

I went back into the living room, sank into my chair, and looked around,
suddenly unsure. I had been absolutely positive that someone had been
here, but why? And who did I imagine was so interested in little old me
that they would come in and leave my modest home exactly as it had been?
Because nothing was missing, nothing disturbed. The pile of newspapers
in the recycle box might be leaning slightly to the left—but was that my
imagination? Couldn't it have been a breeze from the air conditioner?
Nothing was really different, nothing changed or missing; nothing.

And why would anyone break into my apartment at all? There was nothing
special about it—I'd made sure of that. It was part of building my Harry
Profile. Blend in. Act normal, even boring. Don't do anything or own
anything that might cause comment. So had I done. I had no real
valuables other than a stereo and a computer. There were other, far more
attractive targets in the immediate neighborhood.

And in any case, why would somebody break in and then take nothing, do
nothing, leave no sign? I leaned back and closed my eyes; almost
certainly I was imagining the whole thing. This was surely just jangled
nerves. A symptom of sleep deprivation and worrying too much about
Deborah's critically injured career. Just one more small sign that Poor
Old Dexter was drifting off into Deep Water. Making that last painless
transition from sociopath to psychopath. It is not necessarily crazy in
Miami to assume that you are surrounded by anonymous enemies—but to act
like it is socially unacceptable. They would have to put me away at last.

And yet the feeling was so strong. I tried to shake it off: just a whim,
a twitch of the nerves, a passing indigestion. I stood up, stretched,
took a deep breath, and tried to think pretty thoughts. None came. I
shook my head and went into the kitchen for a drink of water and there
it was.

There it was.

I stood in front of the refrigerator and looked, I don't know how long,
just staring stupidly.

Attached to the refrigerator, hair pinned to the door with one of my
small tropical-fruit magnets, was a Barbie doll's head. I did not
remember leaving it there. I did not remember ever owning one. It seemed
like the kind of thing I would remember.

I reached to touch the little plastic head. It swung gently, thumping
against the freezer door with a small /thack/ sound. It turned in a tiny
quarter circle until Barbie looked up at me with alert, Collie-dog
interest. I looked back.

Without really knowing what I was doing or why, I opened the freezer
door. Inside, lying carefully on top of the ice basket, was Barbie's
body. The legs and arms had been pulled off, and the body had been
pulled apart at the waist. The pieces were stacked neatly, wrapped, and
tied with a pink ribbon. And stuck into one tiny Barbie hand was a small
accessory, a Barbie vanity mirror.

After a long moment I closed the freezer door. I wanted to lie down and
press my cheek against the cool linoleum. Instead I reached out with my
little finger and flipped Barbie's head. It went /thack thack/ against
the door. I flipped it again. /Thack thack/. Whee. I had a new hobby.

I left the doll where it was and went back to my chair, sinking deep
into the cushions and closing my eyes. I knew I should be feeling upset,
angry, afraid, violated, filled with paranoid hostility and righteous
rage. I didn't. Instead I felt—what? More than a little light-headed.
Anxious, perhaps—or was it exhilaration?

There was of course no possible doubt about who had been in my
apartment. Unless I could swallow the idea that some stranger, for
unknown reasons, had randomly chosen my apartment as the ideal spot to
display his decapitated Barbie doll.

No. I had been visited by my favorite artist. How he had found me was
not important. It would have been easy enough to jot down my license
number on the causeway that night. He'd had plenty of time to watch me
from his hiding place behind the filling station. And then anyone with
computer literacy could find my address. And having found it, it would
be easy enough to slip in, take a careful look around, and leave a message.

And here was the message: the head hung separately, the body parts
stacked on my ice tray, and that damned mirror again. Combined with the
total lack of interest in everything else in the apartment, it all added
up to only one thing.

But what?

What was he saying?

He could have left anything or nothing. He could have jammed a bloody
butcher knife through a cow's heart and into my linoleum. I was grateful
he hadn't—what a mess—but why Barbie? Aside from the obvious fact that
the doll reflected the body of his last kill, why tell me about it? And
was this more sinister than some other, gooier message—or less? Was it,
“I'm watching and I'll get you”?

Or was he saying, “Hi! Wanna play?”

And I did. Of course I did.

But what about the mirror? To include it this time gave it meaning far
beyond the truck and the chase on the causeway. Now it had to mean much
more. All I could come up with was, “Look at yourself.” And what sense
did that make? Why should I look at myself? I am not vain enough to
enjoy that—at least, I am not vain about my physical appearance. And why
would I even want to look at myself, when what I really wanted was to
see the killer? So there had to be some other meaning to the mirror that
I was not getting.

But even here I could not be sure. It was possible that there was no
real meaning at all. I did not want to believe that of so elegant an
artist, but it was possible. And the message could very well be a
private, deranged, and sinister one. There was absolutely no way to
know. And so, there was also no way to know what I should do about it.
If indeed I should do anything.

I made the human choice. Funny when you think about it; me, making a
human choice. Harry would have been proud. Humanly, I decided to do
nothing. Wait and see. I would not report what had happened. After all,
what was there to report? Nothing was missing. There was nothing at all
to say officially except: “Ah, Captain Matthews, I thought you should
know that someone apparently broke into my apartment and left a Barbie
doll in my freezer.”

That had a very good ring to it. I was sure that would go over well with
the department. Perhaps Sergeant Doakes would investigate personally and
finally be allowed to indulge some hidden talents for unfettered
interrogation. And perhaps they would simply fling me on the Mentally
Unable to Perform list, along with poor Deb, since officially the case
was closing and even when open had nothing to do with Barbie dolls.

No, there was really nothing to tell, not in any way that I could
explain. So at the risk of another savage elbowing, I would not even
tell Deborah. For reasons I could not begin to explain, even to myself,
this was personal. And by keeping it personal, there was a greater
chance that I could get closer to my visitor. In order to bring him to
justice, of course. Naturally.

With the decision made I felt much lighter. Almost giddy, in fact. I had
no idea what might come of it, but I was ready to go with whatever came.
The feeling stayed with me through the night, and even through the next
day at work, as I prepared a lab report, comforted Deb, and stole a
doughnut from Vince Masuoka. It stayed with me during my drive home
through the happily homicidal evening traffic. I was in a state of Zen
readiness, prepared for any surprise.

Or so I thought.

I had just returned to my apartment, leaned back in my chair, and
relaxed, when the phone rang. I let it ring. I wanted to breathe for a
few minutes, and I could think of nothing that couldn't wait. Besides, I
had paid almost $50 for an answering machine. Let it earn its keep.

Two rings. I closed my eyes. Breathed in. Relax, old boy. Three rings.
Breathe out. The answering machine clicked and my wonderfully urbane
message began to play.

“Hello, I'm not in right now, but I'll get back to you right away if
you'll please leave a message, after the beep. Thank you.”

What fabulous vocal tone. What acid wit! A truly great message
altogether. It sounded nearly human. I was very proud. I breathed in
again, listening to the melodic BEEEEP! that followed.

“Hi, it's me.”

A female voice. Not Deborah. I felt one eyelid twitch in irritation. Why
do so many people start their messages with “It's me”? Of course it is
you. We all know that. But who the hell ARE you? In my case the choices
were rather limited. I knew it wasn't Deborah. It didn't sound like
LaGuerta, although anything was possible. So that left—

/Rita?/

“Um, I'm sorry, I—” A long breath sighing out. “Listen, Dexter, I'm
sorry. I thought you would call me and then when you didn't I just—”
Another long breath out. “Anyway. I need to talk. Because I realized . .
. I mean—oh hell. Could you, um, call me? If—you know.”

I didn't know. Not at all. I wasn't even sure who it was. Could that
really be Rita?

Another long sigh. “I'm sorry if—” And a very long pause. Two full
breaths. In deeply, out. In deeply, then blown out abruptly. “Please
call me, Dexter. Just—” A long pause. Another sigh. Then she hung up.

Many times in my life I have felt like I was missing something, some
essential piece of the puzzle that everybody else carried around with
them without thinking about it. I don't usually mind, since most of
those times it turns out to be an astonishingly stupid piece of humania
like understanding the infield fly rule or not going all the way on the
first date.

But at other times I feel like I am missing out on a great reservoir of
warm wisdom, the lore of some sense I don't possess that humans feel so
deeply they don't need to talk about it and can't even put it into words.

This was one of those times.

I knew I was supposed to understand that Rita was actually saying
something very specific, that her pauses and stutters added up to a
great and marvelous thing that a human male would intuitively grasp. But
I had not a single clue as to what it might be, nor how to figure it
out. Should I count the breaths? Time the pauses and convert the numbers
to Bible verses to arrive at the secret code? What was she trying to
tell me? And why, for that matter, was she trying to tell me anything at
all?

As I understood things, when I had kissed Rita on that strange and
stupid impulse, I had crossed a line we had both agreed to keep
uncrossed. With that thing done there was no undoing it, no going back.
In its own way the kiss had been an act of murder. At any rate, it was
comforting to think so. I had killed our careful relationship by driving
my tongue through its heart and pushing it off a cliff. Boom, a dead
thing. I hadn't even thought about Rita since. She was gone, shoved out
of my life by an incomprehensible whim.

And now she was calling me and recording her breathing for my amusement.

Why? Did she want to chastise me? Call me names, rub my nose in my
folly, force me to understand the immensity of my offense?

The whole thing began to irritate me beyond measure. I paced around my
apartment. Why should I have to think about Rita at all? I had more
important concerns at the moment. Rita was merely my beard, a silly
kid's costume I wore on weekends to hide the fact that I was the kind of
person who did the things that this other interesting fellow was now
doing and I wasn't.

Was this jealousy? Of course I wasn't doing those things. I had just
recently finished for the time being. I certainly wouldn't do it again
anytime soon. Too risky. I hadn't prepared anything.

And yet—

I walked back into the kitchen and flicked the Barbie head. /Thack.
Thack thack/. I seemed to be feeling something here. Playfulness? Deep
and abiding concern? Professional jealousy? I couldn't say, and Barbie
wasn't talking.

It was just too much. The obviously fake confession, the violation of my
inner sanctum, and now Rita? A man can take only so much. Even a phony
man like me. I began to feel unsettled, dizzy, confused, hyperactive and
lethargic at the same time. I walked to the window and looked out. It
was dark now and far away over the water a light rose up in the sky and
at the sight of it a small and evil voice rose up to meet it from
somewhere deep inside.

/Moon./

A whisper in my ear. Not even a sound; just the slight sense of someone
speaking your name, almost heard, somewhere nearby. Very near, perhaps
getting closer. No words at all, just a dry rustle of not-voice, a tone
off-tone, a thought on a breath. My face felt hot and I could suddenly
hear myself breathing. The voice came again, a soft sound dropped on the
outer edge of my ear. I turned, even though I knew no one was there and
it was not my ear but my dear friend inside, kicked into consciousness
by who knows what and the moon.

Such a fat happy chatterbox moon. Oh how much it had to say. And as much
as I tried to tell it that the time was wrong, that this was much too
soon, there were other things to do now, important things—the moon had
words for all of it and more. And so even though I stood there for a
quarter of an hour and argued, there was never really any question.

I grew desperate, fighting it with all the tricks I had, and when that
failed I did something that shocked me to my very core. I called Rita.

“Oh, Dexter,” she said. “I just—I was afraid. Thank you for calling. I
just—”

“I know,” I said, although of course I did not know.

“Could we—I don't know what you— Can I see you later and just—I would
really like to talk to you.”

“Of course,” I told her, and as we agreed to meet later at her place, I
wondered what she might possibly have in mind. Violence? Tears of
recrimination? Full-throated name-calling? I was on foreign turf here—I
could be walking into anything.

And after I hung up, the whole thing distracted me wonderfully for
almost half an hour before the soft interior voice came sliding back
into my brain with its quiet insistence that tonight really ought to be
special.

I felt myself pulled back to the window and there it was again, the huge
happy face in the sky, the chuckling moon. I pulled the curtain and
turned away, circled my apartment from room to room, touching things,
telling myself I was checking once more for whatever might be missing,
knowing nothing was missing, and knowing why, too. And each time around
the apartment I circled closer and closer to the small desk in the
living room where I kept my computer, knowing what I wanted to do and
not wanting to do it, until finally, after three-quarters of an hour,
the pull was too strong. I was too dizzy to stand and thought I would
just slump into the chair since it was close at hand, and since I was
there anyway I turned on the computer, and once it was on . . .

/But it's not done/, I thought, /I'm not ready/.

And of course, that didn't matter. Whether I was ready or not made no
difference at all. /It/ was ready.

CHAPTER 14

I WAS ALMOST CERTAIN HE WAS THE ONE, BUT ONLY almost, and I had never
been only /almost/ certain before. I felt weak, intoxicated, half sick
with a combination of excitement and uncertainty and complete
wrongness—but of course, the Dark Passenger was driving from the
backseat now and how I felt was not terribly important anymore because
/he/ felt strong and cold and eager and ready. And I could feel him
swelling inside me, surging up out of the Dexter-dark corners of my
lizard brain, a rising and swelling that could only end one way and that
being the case it rather had to be with this one.

I had found him several months ago, but after a little bit of
observation I'd decided that the priest was a sure thing and this one
could wait a little longer until I was positive.

How wrong I had been. I now found he couldn't wait at all.

He lived on a small street in Coconut Grove. A few blocks to one side of
his crummy little house the neighborhood was low-income black housing,
barbecue joints, and crumbling churches. Half a mile in the other
direction the millionaires lived in overgrown modern houses and built
coral walls to keep out people like him. But Jamie Jaworski was right in
between, in a house he shared with a million palmetto bugs and the
ugliest dog I had ever seen.

It was still a house he shouldn't have been able to afford. Jaworski was
a part-time janitor at Ponce de Leon Junior High, and as far as I could
tell that was his only source of income. He worked three days a week,
which might be just enough to live on but not much more. Of course, I
was not interested in his finances. I was very interested in the fact
that there had been a small but significant increase in runaway children
from Ponce since Jaworski had begun to work there. All of them twelve-
to thirteen-year-old light-haired girls.

Light-haired. That was important. For some reason it was the kind of
detail that police often seem to overlook but always jumped out at
someone like me. Perhaps it didn't seem politically correct; dark-haired
girls, and dark-skinned girls, should have an equal opportunity to be
kidnapped, sexually abused, and then cut up in front of a camera, don't
you think?

Jaworski, too, often seemed to be the missing kid's last witness. The
police had talked to him, held him overnight, questioned him, and had
not been able to make anything stick to him. Of course, they have to
meet certain petty legal requirements. Torture, for example, was frowned
on lately, for the most part. And without some very forceful persuasion,
Jamie Jaworski was never going to open up about his hobby. I know I
wouldn't.

But I knew he was doing it. He was helping those girls disappear into
very quick and final movie careers. I was almost positive. I had not
found any body parts and hadn't seen him do it, but everything fit. And
on the Internet I did manage to locate some particularly inventive
pictures of three of the missing girls. They did not look very happy in
those pictures, although some of the things they were doing were
supposed to bring joy, I have been told.

I could not positively connect Jaworski with the pictures. But the
mailbox address was South Miami, a few minutes from the school. And he
was living above his means. And in any case I was being reminded with
increasing force from the dark backseat that I was out of time, that
this was not a case where certainty was terribly important.

But the ugly dog worried me. Dogs were always a problem. They don't like
me and they quite often disapprove of what I do to their masters,
especially since I don't share the good pieces. I had to find a way
around the dog to Jaworski. Perhaps he would come out. If not, I had to
find a way in.

I drove past Jaworski's house three times but nothing occurred to me. I
needed some luck and I needed it before the Dark Passenger made me do
something hasty. And just as my dear friend began to whisper imprudent
suggestions, I got my small piece of luck. Jaworski came out of his
house and climbed into his battered red Toyota pickup as I drove past. I
slowed down as much as I could, and in a moment he backed out and yanked
his little truck toward Douglas Road. I turned around and followed.

I had no idea how I was going to do this. I was not prepared. I had no
safe room, no clean coveralls, nothing but a roll of duct tape and a
filet knife under my seat. I had to be unseen, unnoticed, and perfect,
and I had no idea how. I hated to improvise, but I was not being offered
a choice.

Once again I was lucky. Traffic was very light as Jaworski drove south
to Old Cutler Road, and after a mile or so he turned left toward the
water. Another huge new development was going up to improve life for all
of us by turning trees and animals into cement and old people from New
Jersey. Jaworski drove slowly through the construction, past half a golf
course with the flags in place but no grass on it, until he came almost
to the water. The skeleton of a large, half-finished block of condos
blotted out the moon. I dropped far back, turned out my headlights, and
then inched close enough to see what my boy was up to.

Jaworski had pulled in beside the block of condos-to-be and parked. He
got out and stood between his little truck and a huge pile of sand. For
a moment he just looked around and I pulled onto the shoulder and turned
off the engine. Jaworski stared at the condos and then down the road
toward the water. He seemed satisfied and went into the building. I was
quite certain that he was looking for a guard. I was, too. I hoped he
had done his homework. Most often in these huge uberdevelopments one
guard rides around from site to site in a golf cart. It saves money, and
anyway, this is Miami. A certain amount of the overhead on any project
is for material that is expected to disappear quietly. It looked to me
like Jaworski planned to help the builder meet his quota.

I got out of my car and slipped my filet knife and duct tape into a
cheap tote bag I'd brought along. I had already stuffed some rubberized
gardening gloves and a few pictures inside it, nothing much. Just
trifles I'd downloaded from the Internet. I shrugged the bag onto my
shoulder and moved quietly through the night until I came to his grungy
little truck. The bed was as empty as the cab. Heaps of Burger King cups
and wrappers, empty Camel packs on the floor. Nothing that wasn't small
and dirty, like Jaworski himself.

I looked up. Above the rim of the half-condo I could just see the glow
of the moon. A night wind blew across my face, bringing with it all the
enchanting odors of our tropical paradise: diesel oil, decaying
vegetation, and cement. I inhaled it deeply and turned my thoughts back
to Jaworski.

He was somewhere inside the shell of the building. I didn't know how
long I had, and a certain small voice was urging me to hurry. I left the
truck and went into the building. As I stepped through the door I heard
him. Or rather, I heard a strange whirring, rattling sound that had to
be him, or—

I paused. The sound came from off to one side and I whisper-footed over
to it. A pipe ran up the wall, an electrical conduit. I placed a hand on
the pipe and felt it vibrate, as if something inside was moving.

A small light went on in my brain. Jaworski was pulling out the wire.
Copper was very expensive, and there was a thriving black market for
copper in any form. It was one more small way to supplement a meager
janitorial salary, helping to cover the long, poverty-strewn stretches
between young runaways. He could make several hundred dollars for one
load of copper.

Now that I knew what he was up to, a vague outline of an idea began to
take root in my brain. From the sound, he was above me somewhere. I
could easily track him, shadow him until the time was right, and then
pounce. But I was practically naked here, completely exposed and
unready. I was used to doing these things a certain way. To step outside
my own careful boundaries made me extremely uncomfortable.

A small shudder crawled up my spine. Why was I doing this?

The quick answer, of course, was that I wasn't doing it at all. My dear
friend in the dark backseat was doing it. I was just along because I had
the driver's license. But we had reached an understanding, he and I. We
had achieved a careful, balanced existence, a way to live together,
through our Harry solution. And now he was rampaging outside Harry's
careful, beautiful chalk lines. Why? Anger? Was the invasion of my home
really such an outrage that it woke him to strike out in revenge?

He didn't /feel/ angry to me—as always he seemed cool, quietly amused,
eager for his prey. And I didn't feel angry either. I felt—half drunk,
high as a kite, teetering on the knife edge of euphoria, wobbling
through a series of inner ripples that felt curiously like I have always
thought emotions must feel. And the giddiness of it had driven me to
this dangerous, unclean, unplanned place, to do something on the spur of
the moment that always before I had planned carefully. And even knowing
all this, I badly wanted to do it. /Had/ to do it.

Very well then. But I didn't have to do it undressed. I looked around. A
large pile of Sheetrock squatted at the far end of the room, bound with
shrink-wrap. A moment's work and I had cut myself an apron and a strange
transparent mask from the shrink-wrap; nose, mouth, and eyes sliced away
so I could breathe, talk, and see. I pulled it tight, feeling it mash my
features into something unrecognizable. I twisted the ends behind my
head and tied a clumsy knot in the plastic. Perfect anonymity. It might
seem silly, but I was used to hunting with a mask. And aside from a
neurotic compulsion to make everything /right/, it was simply one less
thing to think about. It made me relax a little, so it was a good idea.
I took the gloves from the tote bag and slipped them on. I was ready now.

I found Jaworski on the third floor. A pile of electrical wire pooled at
his feet. I stood in the shadows of the stairwell and watched as he
pulled out wire. I ducked back into the stairwell and opened my tote
bag. Using my duct tape, I hung up the pictures I had brought along.
Sweet little photos of the runaway girls, in a variety of endearing and
very explicit poses. I taped them to the concrete walls where Jaworski
would see them as he stepped through the door onto the stairs.

I looked back in at Jaworski. He pulled out another twenty yards of
wire. It stuck on something and would pull no more. Jaworski yanked
twice, then pulled a pair of heavy cutters from his back pocket and
snipped the wire. He picked up the wire lying at his feet and wound it
into a tight coil on his forearm. Then he walked toward the
stairs—toward me.

I shrank back into the stairwell and waited.

Jaworski wasn't trying to be quiet. He was not expecting any
interruption—and he certainly wasn't expecting me. I listened to his
footsteps and the small rattle of the wire coil dragging behind him. Closer—

He came through the door and a step past without seeing me. And then he
saw the pictures.

“Whooof,” he said, as though he had been hit hard in the stomach. He
stared, slack-jawed, unable to move, and then I was behind him with my
knife at his throat.

“Don't move and don't make a sound,” we said.

“Hey, lookit—” he said.

I turned my wrist slightly and pushed the knife point into his skin
under the chin. He hissed as a distressing, awful little spurt of blood
squirted out. So unnecessary. Why can't people ever listen?

“I said, don't make a sound,” we told him, and now he was quiet.

And then the only sound was the ratcheting of the duct tape, Jaworski's
breathing, and the quiet chuckle from the Dark Passenger. I taped over
his mouth, twisted a length of the janitor's precious copper wire around
his wrists, and dragged him over to another stack of shrink-wrapped
Sheetrock. In just a few moments I had him trussed up and secured to the
makeshift table.

“Let's talk,” we said in the Dark Passenger's gentle, cold voice.

He didn't know if he was allowed to speak, and the duct tape would have
made it difficult in any case, so he stayed silent.

“Let's talk about runaways,” we said, ripping the duct tape from his mouth.

“Yaaaooww— Whu—whataya mean?” he said. But he was not very convincing.

“I think you know what I mean,” we told him.

“Nuh-no,” he said.

“Yuh-yes,” we said.

Probably one word too clever. My timing was off, the whole evening was
off. But he got brave. He looked up at me in my shiny face. “What are
you, a cop or something?” he asked.

“No,” we said, and sliced off his left ear. It was closest. The knife
was sharp and for a moment he couldn't believe it was happening to him,
permanent and forever no left ear. So I dropped the ear on his chest to
let him believe. His eyes got huge and he filled his lungs to scream,
but I stuffed a wad of plastic wrap in his mouth just before he did.

“None of that,” we said. “Worse things can happen.” And they would, oh
definitely, but he didn't need to know that yet.

“The runaways?” we asked gently, coldly, and waited for just a moment,
watching his eyes, to make sure he wouldn't scream, then removed the gag.

“Jesus,” he said hoarsely. “My ear—”

“You have another, just as good,” we said. “Tell us about the girls in
those pictures.”

“Us? What do you mean, us? Jesus, that hurts,” he whimpered.

Some people just don't get it. I put the plastic stuff back in his mouth
and went to work.

I almost got carried away; easy to do, under the circumstances. My heart
was racing like mad and I had to fight hard to keep my hand from
shaking. But I went to work, exploring, looking for something that was
always just beyond my fingertips. Exciting—and terribly frustrating. The
pressure was rising inside me, climbing up into my ears and screaming
for release—but no release came. Just the growing pressure, and the
sense that something wonderful was just beyond my senses, waiting for me
to find it and dive in. But I did not find it, and none of my old
standards gave me any joy at all. What to do? In my confusion I opened
up a vein and a horrible puddle of blood formed on the plastic wrap
alongside the janitor. I stopped for a moment, looking for an answer,
finding nothing. I looked away, out the shell of the window. I stared,
forgetting to breathe.

The moon was visible over the water. For some reason I could not explain
that seemed so right, so /necessary/, that for a moment I just looked
out across the water, watching it shimmer, so very perfect. I swayed and
bumped against my makeshift table and came back to myself. But the moon
. . . or was it the water?

So close . . . I was so close to something I could almost smell—but
what? A shiver ran through me—and that was right, too, so right it set
off a whole chain of shivers until my teeth chattered. But why? What did
it mean? Something was there, something /important/, an overwhelming
purity and clarity riding the moon and the water just beyond the tip of
my filet knife, and I couldn't catch it.

I looked back at the janitor. He made me so angry, the way he was lying
there, covered with improvised marks and unnecessary blood. But it was
hard to stay angry, with the beautiful Florida moon pounding at me, the
tropical breeze blowing, the wonderful night sounds of flexing duct tape
and panic breathing. I almost had to laugh. Some people choose to die
for some very unusual things, but this horrid little bug, dying for
copper wire. And the look on his face: so hurt and confused and
desperate. It would have been funny if I hadn't felt so frustrated.

And he really did deserve a better effort from me; after all, it wasn't
his fault I was off my usual form. He wasn't even vile enough to be at
the top of my TO DO list. He was just a repulsive little slug who killed
children for money and kicks, and only four or five of them as far as I
knew. I almost felt sorry for him. He truly wasn't ready for the major
leagues.

Ah, well. Back to work. I stepped back to Jaworski's side. He was not
thrashing as much now, but he was still far too lively for my usual
methods. Of course I did not have all my highly professional toys
tonight and the going must have been a little rough for Jaworski. But
like a real trouper, he had not complained. I felt a surge of affection
and slowed down my slapdash approach, spending some quality time on his
hands. He responded with real enthusiasm and I drifted away, lost in
happy research.

Eventually it was his muffled screams and wild thrashing that called me
back to myself. And I remembered I had not even made sure of his guilt.
I waited for him to calm down, then removed the plastic from his mouth.

“The runaways?” we asked.

“Oh Jesus. Oh God. Oh Jesus,” he said weakly.

“I don't think so,” we said. “I think we may have left them behind.”

“Please,” he said. “Oh, please . . .”

“Tell me about the runaways,” we said.

“Okay,” he breathed.

“You took those girls.”

“Yes. . . .”

“How many?”

He just breathed for a moment. His eyes were closed and I thought I
might have lost him a little early. He finally opened his eyes and
looked at me. “Five,” he said at last. “Five little beauties. I'm not
sorry.”

“Of course you're not,” we said. I placed a hand on his arm. It was a
beautiful moment. “And now, I'm not sorry either.”

I stuffed the plastic into his mouth and went back to work. But I had
really only just started to recapture my rhythm when I heard the guard
arrive downstairs.

CHAPTER 15

IT WAS THE STATIC OF HIS RADIO THAT GAVE HIM away. I was deeply
involved in something I'd never tried before when I heard it. I was
working on the torso with the knife point and could feel the first real
tinglings of response down my spine and through my legs and I didn't
want to stop. But a radio— This was worse news than a mere guard
arriving. If he called for backup or to have the road blocked, it was
just possible that I might find a few of the things I had been doing a
little difficult to explain.

I looked down at Jaworski. He was nearly done now, and yet I was not
happy with how things had gone. Far too much mess, and I had not really
found what I was looking for. There had been a few moments where I felt
on the brink of some wonderful thing, some amazing revelation to do
with—what? the water flowing by outside the window?—but it had not
happened, whatever it had been. Now I was left with an unfinished,
unclean, untidy, unsatisfying child rapist, and a security guard on his
way to join us.

I hate to rush the conclusion. It's such an important moment, and a real
relief for both of us, the Dark Passenger and I. But what choice did I
have? For a long moment—far too long, really, and I'm quite ashamed—I
thought about killing the guard and going on. It would be easy, and I
could continue to explore with a fresh start—

But no. Of course not. It wouldn't do. The guard was innocent, as
innocent as anyone can be and still live in Miami. He'd probably done
nothing worse than shoot at other drivers on the Palmetto Expressway a
few times. Practically snow-white. No, I had to make a hasty retreat,
and that was all there was to it. And if I had to leave the janitor not
quite finished and me not quite satisfied—well, better luck next time.

I stared down at the grubby little insect and felt myself fill with
loathing. The thing was drooling snot and blood all together, the ugly
wet slop burbling across his face. A trickle of awful red came from his
mouth. In a quick fit of pique, I slashed across Jaworski's throat. I
immediately regretted my rashness. A fountain of horrible blood came out
and the sight made it all seem even more regrettable, a messy mistake.
Feeling unclean and unsatisfied, I sprinted for the stairwell. A cold
and petulant grumbling from my Dark Passenger followed me.

I turned out onto the second floor and slid sideways over to a glassless
window. Below me I could see the guard's golf cart parked, pointing in
the direction of Old Cutler—meaning, I hoped, that he had come from the
other direction and had not seen my car. Standing beside the cart, a fat
olive-skinned young man with black hair and a wispy black mustache was
looking up at the building—luckily, looking at the other end at the moment.

What had he heard? Was he merely on his regular route? I had to hope so.
If he had actually heard something— If he stood outside and called for
help, I was probably going to be caught. And as clever and glib-tongued
as I was, I did not think I was good enough to talk my way out of this.

The young guard touched a thumb to his mustache and stroked it as if to
encourage fuller growth. He frowned, swept his gaze along the front of
the building. I ducked back. When I peeked out again a moment later I
could just see the top of his head. He was coming in.

I waited until I heard his feet in the stairwell. Then I was out the
window, halfway between the first and second floors, hanging by my
fingertips from the coarse cement of the windowsill, then dropping. I
hit badly, one ankle twisting on a rock, one knuckle skinned. But in my
very best rapid limp I hurried into the shadows and scurried for my car.

My heart was pounding when I finally slid into the driver's seat. I
looked back and saw no sign of the guard. I started the engine and, with
the lights still off, I drove as quickly and quietly as I could out onto
Old Cutler Road, heading toward South Miami and taking the long way home
along Dixie Highway. My pulse still pounded in my ears. What a stupid
risk to take. I had never before done anything so impulsive, never
before done anything at all without careful planning. That was the Harry
Way: be careful, be safe, be prepared. The Dark Scouts.

And instead, this. I could have been caught. I could have been seen.
Stupid, stupid—if I had not heard the young security guard in time I
might have had to kill him. Kill an innocent man with violence; I was
quite sure Harry would disapprove. And it was so messy and unpleasant, too.

Of course I was still not safe—the guard might easily have written down
my license number if he had passed my car in his little golf cart. I had
taken brainless, terrible risks, gone against all my careful procedures,
gambled my entire carefully built life—and for what? A thrill kill?
Shame on me. And deep in the shaded corner of my mind the echo came, /Oh
yes, shame/, and the familiar chuckle.

I took a deep breath and looked at my hand on the steering wheel. But it
/had/ been thrilling, hadn't it? It had been wildly exciting, full of
life and new sensations and profound frustration. It had been something
entirely new and interesting. And the odd sensation that it was all
going somewhere, an important place that was new and yet familiar—I
would really have to explore that a little better next time.

Not that there was going to be a next time, of course. I would certainly
never again do anything so foolish and impulsive. Never. But to have
done it once—kind of fun.

Never mind. I would go home and take an exceptionally long shower, and
by the time I was done—

/Time/. It came into my mind unwanted and unasked. I had agreed to meet
with Rita at—right about now, according to my dashboard clock. And for
what dark purpose? I couldn't know what went on in the human female
mind. Why did I even have to think about “for what” at a time like this,
when all my nerve endings were standing up and yodeling with
frustration? I did not care what Rita wanted to yell at me about. It
would not really bother me, whatever sharp observations she had to make
on my character defects, but it was irritating to be forced to spend
time listening when I had other, far more important things to think
about. Most particularly, I wanted to wonder what I should have done
that I had not done with dear departed Jaworski. Up to the cruelly
interrupted and unfinished climax so many new things had happened that
needed my very best mental efforts; I needed to reflect, to consider,
and to understand where it had all been leading me. And how did it
relate to that other artist out there, shadowing me and challenging me
with his work?

With all this to think about, why did I need Rita right now?

But of course I would go. And of course, it would actually serve some
humble purpose if I should need an alibi for my adventure with the
little janitor. “Why, Detective, how could you possibly think that I—?
Besides, I was having a fight with my girlfriend at the time.
Ah—ex-girlfriend, actually.” Because there was absolutely no doubt in my
mind that Rita merely wanted to—what was the word we were all using
lately? Vent? Yes, Rita wanted me to come over so she could vent on me.
I had certain major character flaws that she needed to point out with an
accompanying burst of emotion, and my presence was necessary.

Since this was the case, I took an extra minute to clean up. I circled
back toward Coconut Grove and parked on the far side of the bridge over
the waterway. A good deep channel ran underneath. I rolled a couple of
large coral rocks out of the trees at the edge of the waterway, stuffed
them into my tote bag, which was loaded with the plastic, gloves, and
knife, and flung the thing into the center of the channel.

I stopped once more, at a small, dark park almost to Rita's house, and
washed off carefully. I had to be neat and presentable; getting yelled
at by a furious woman should be treated as a semiformal occasion.

But imagine my surprise when I rang her doorbell a few minutes later.
She did not fling wide the door and begin to hurl furniture and abuse at
me. In fact, she opened the door very slowly and carefully, half hiding
behind it, as if badly frightened of what might be waiting for her on
the other side. And considering that it was me waiting, this showed rare
common sense.

“Dexter?” she said, softly, shyly, sounding like she wasn't sure whether
she wanted me to answer yes or no. “I . . . didn't think you were coming.”

“And yet here I am,” I said helpfully.

She didn't answer for a much longer time than seemed right. Finally, she
nudged the door slightly more open and said, “Would you . . . come in?
Please?”

And if her uncertain, limping tone of voice, unlike any I had ever heard
her use before, was a surprise, imagine how astonished I was by her
costume. I believe the thing was called a peignoir; or possibly it was a
negligee, since it certainly was negligible as far as the amount of
fabric used in its construction was concerned. Whatever the correct
name, she was certainly wearing it. And as bizarre as the idea was, I
believe the costume was aimed at me.

“Please?” she repeated.

It was all a little much. I mean, really, what was I supposed to do
here? I was bubbling over with unsatisfied experimentation on the
janitor; there were still unhappy murmurings filtering through from the
backseat. And a quick check of the situation at large revealed that I
was being whipsawed between dear Deb and the dark artist, and now I was
expected to do some sort of human thing here, like—well, what, after
all? She surely couldn't want—I mean, wasn't she MAD at me? What was
going on here? And why was it going on with me?

“I sent the kids next door,” Rita said. She bumped the door with her hip.

I went in.

I can think of a great many ways to describe what happened next, but
none of them seem adequate. She went to the couch. I followed. She sat
down. So did I. She looked uncomfortable and squeezed her left hand with
her right. She seemed to be waiting for something, and since I was not
quite sure what, I found myself thinking about my unfinished work with
Jaworski. If only I'd had a little more time! The things I might have done!

And as I thought of some of those things, I became aware that Rita had
quietly started to cry. I stared at her for a moment, trying to suppress
the images of a flayed and bloodless janitor. For the life of me I could
not understand why she was crying, but since I had practiced long and
hard at imitating human beings, I knew that I was supposed to comfort
her. I leaned toward her and put an arm across her shoulder. “Rita,” I
said. “There, there.” Not really a line worthy of me, but it was
well-thought-of by many experts. And it was effective. Rita lunged
forward and leaned her face into my chest. I tightened my arm around
her, which brought my hand back into view. Less than an hour ago that
same hand had been holding a filet knife over the little janitor. The
thought made me dizzy.

And really, I don't know how it happened, but it did. One moment I was
patting her and saying, “There, there,” and staring at the cords in my
hand, feeling the sense memory pulse through the fingers, the surge of
power and brightness as the knife explored Jaworski's abdomen. And the
next moment—

I believe Rita looked up at me. I am also reasonably certain that I
looked back. And yet somehow it was not Rita I saw but a neat stack of
cool and bloodless limbs. And it was not Rita's hands I felt on my belt
buckle, but the rising unsatisfied chorus from the Dark Passenger. And
some little time later—

Well. It's still somewhat unthinkable. I mean, right there on the couch.

How on earth did /that/ happen?

 

By the time I climbed into my little bed I was thoroughly whipped. I
don't ordinarily require a great deal of sleep, but I felt as though
tonight I might need a nice solid thirty-six hours. The ups and downs of
the evening, the strain of so much new experience—it had all been
draining. More draining for Jaworski, of course, the nasty wet little
thing, but I had used all my adrenaline for the month in this one
impetuous evening. I could not even begin to think what any of it meant,
from the strange impulse to fly out into the night so madly and rashly,
all the way through to the unthinkable things that had happened with
Rita. I had left her asleep and apparently much happier. But poor dark
deranged Dexter was without a clue once again, and when my head hit the
pillow I fell asleep almost instantly.

/And there I was out over the city like a boneless bird, flowing and
swift and the cold air moved around me and drew me on, pulled me down to
where the moonlight rippled on the water and I slash into the tight cold
killing room where the little janitor looks up at me and laughs,
spread-eagled under the knife and laughing, and the effort of it
contorts his face, changes it, and now he is not Jaworski anymore but a
woman and the man holding the knife looks up to where I float above the
whirling red viscera and as the face comes up I can hear Harry outside
the door and I turn just before I can see who it is on the table but—/

I woke up. The pain in my head would split a cantaloupe. I felt like I
had hardly closed my eyes, but the bedside clock said it was 5:14.

Another dream. Another long-distance call on my phantom party line. No
wonder I had steadfastly refused to have dreams for most of my life. So
stupid; such pointless, obvious symbols. Totally uncontrollable anxiety
soup, hateful, blatant nonsense.

And now I couldn't get back to sleep, thinking of the infantile images.
If I had to dream, why couldn't it be more like me, interesting and
different?

I sat up and rubbed my throbbing temples. Terrible, tedious
unconsciousness dripped away like a draining sinus and I sat on the edge
of the bed in bleary befuddlement. What was happening to me? And why
couldn't it happen to someone else?

This dream had felt different and I wasn't sure what that difference was
or what it meant. The last time I had been absolutely certain that
another murder was about to happen, and even knew where. But this time—

I sighed and padded into the kitchen for a drink of water. Barbie's head
went /thack thack/ as I opened the refrigerator. I stood and watched,
sipping a large glass of cold water. The bright blue eyes stared back at
me, unblinking.

Why had I had a dream? Was it just the strain of last evening's
adventures playing back from my battered subconscious? I had never felt
strain before; actually, it had always been a /release/ of strain. Of
course, I had never come so close to disaster before, either. But why
dream about it? Some of the images were too painfully obvious: Jaworski
and Harry and the unseen face of the man with the knife. Really now. Why
bother me with stuff from freshman psychology?

Why bother me with a dream at all? I didn't need it. I needed rest—and
instead, here I was in the kitchen playing with a Barbie doll. I flipped
the head again: /thack thack/. For that matter, what was Barbie all
about? And how was I going to figure this out in time to rescue
Deborah's career? How could I get around LaGuerta when the poor thing
was so taken with me? And by all that was holy, if anything actually
was, why had Rita needed to do THAT to me?

It seemed suddenly like a twisted soap opera, and it was far too much. I
found some aspirin and leaned against the kitchen counter as I ate three
of them. I didn't much care for the taste. I had never liked medicine of
any kind, except in a utilitarian way.

Especially since Harry had died.

CHAPTER 16

HARRY DID NOT DIE QUICKLY AND HE DID NOT DIE easily. He took his own
terrible long time, the first and last selfish thing he had ever done in
his life. Harry died for a year and a half, in little stages, slipping
for a few weeks, fighting back to almost full strength again, keeping us
all dizzy with trying to guess. Would he go now, this time, or had he
beaten it altogether? We never knew, but because it was Harry it seemed
foolish for us to give up. Harry would do what was right, no matter how
hard, but what did that mean in dying? Was it right to fight and hang on
and make the rest of us suffer through an endless death, when death was
coming no matter what Harry did? Or was it right to slip away gracefully
and without fuss?

At nineteen, I certainly didn't know the answer, although I already knew
more about death than most of the other pimple-ridden puddingheads in my
sophomore class at the University of Miami.

And one fine autumn afternoon after a chemistry class, as I walked
across the campus toward the student union, Deborah appeared beside me.
“Deborah,” I called to her, sounding very collegiate, I thought, “come
have a Coke.” Harry had told me to hang out at the union and have Cokes.
He'd said it would help me pass for human, and learn how other humans
behaved. And of course, he was right. In spite of the damage to my
teeth, I was learning a great deal about the unpleasant species.

Deborah, at seventeen, already far too serious, shook her head. “It's
Dad,” she said. And very shortly we were driving across town to the
hospice where they had taken Harry. Hospice was not good news. That
meant the doctors were saying that Harry was ready to die, and
suggesting that he cooperate.

Harry did not look good when we got there. He looked so green and still
against the sheets that I thought we were too late. He was spindly and
gaunt from his long fight, looking for all the world as though something
inside him was eating its way out. The respirator beside him hissed, a
Darth Vader sound from a living grave. Harry was alive, strictly
speaking. “Dad,” Deborah said, taking his hand. “I brought Dexter.”

Harry opened his eyes and his head rolled toward us, almost as if some
invisible hand had pushed it from the far side of the pillow. But they
were not Harry's eyes. They were murky blue pits, dull and empty,
uninhabited. Harry's body might be alive, but he was not home.

“It isn't good,” the nurse told us. “We're just trying to make him
comfortable now.” And she busied herself with a large hypodermic needle
from a tray, filling it and holding it up to squirt out the air bubble.

“Wait . . .” It was so faint I thought at first it might be the
respirator. I looked around the room and my eyes finally fell on what
was left of Harry. Behind the dull emptiness of his eyes a small spark
was shining. “Wait . . . ,” he said again, nodding toward the nurse.

She either didn't hear him or had decided to ignore him. She stepped to
his side and gently lifted his stick arm. She began to swab it with a
cotton ball.

“No . . . ,” Harry gasped gently, almost inaudibly.

I looked at Deborah. She seemed to be standing at attention in a perfect
posture of formal uncertainty. I looked back at Harry. His eyes locked
onto mine.

“No . . . ,” he said, and there was something very close to horror in
his eyes now. “No . . . shot . . .”

I stepped forward and put a restraining hand on the nurse, just before
she plunged the needle into Harry's vein. “Wait,” I said. She looked up
at me, and for the tiniest fraction of a second there was something in
her eyes. I almost fell backward in surprise. It was a cold rage, an
inhuman, lizard-brain sense of I-Want, a belief that the world was her
very own game preserve. Just that one flash, but I was sure. She wanted
to ram the needle into my eye for interrupting her. She wanted to shove
it into my chest and twist until my ribs popped and my heart burst
through into her hands and she could squeeze, twist, rip my life out of
me. This was a monster, a hunter, a killer. This was a predator, a
soulless and evil thing.

Just like me.

But her granola smile returned very quickly. “What is it, honey?” she
said, ever so sweetly, so perfectly Last Nurse.

My tongue felt much too large for my mouth and it seemed like it took me
several minutes to answer, but I finally managed to say, “He doesn't
want the shot.”

She smiled again, a beautiful thing that sat on her face like the
blessing of an all-wise god. “Your dad is very sick,” she said. “He's in
a lot of pain.” She held the needle up and a melodramatic shaft of light
from the window hit it. The needle sparkled like her very own Holy
Grail. “He needs a shot,” she said.

“He doesn't want it,” I said.

“He's in pain,” she said.

Harry said something I could not hear. My eyes were locked on the nurse,
and hers on mine, two monsters standing over the same meat. Without
looking away from her I leaned down next to him.

“I—WANT . . . pain . . . ,” Harry said.

It jerked my gaze down to him. Behind the emerging skeleton, nestled
snugly under the crew cut that seemed suddenly too big for his head,
Harry had returned and was fighting his way up through the fog. He
nodded at me, reached very slowly for my hand and squeezed.

I looked back at Last Nurse. “He wants the pain,” I told her, and
somewhere in her small frown, the petulant shake of her head, I heard
the roar of a savage beast watching its prey scuttle down a hole.

“I'll have to tell the doctor,” she said.

“All right,” I told her. “We'll wait here.”

I watched her sail out into the hallway like some large and deadly bird.
I felt a pressure on my hand. Harry watched me watching Last Nurse.

“You . . . can tell . . . ,” Harry said.

“About the nurse?” I asked him. He closed his eyes and nodded lightly,
just once. “Yes,” I said. “I can tell.”

“Like . . . you . . . ,” Harry said.

“What?” Deborah demanded. “What are you talking about? Daddy, are you
all right? What does that mean, like you?”

“She likes me,” I said. “He thinks the nurse may have a crush on me,
Deb,” I told her, and turned back to Harry.

“Oh, right,” Deborah muttered, but I was already concentrating on Harry.

“What has she done?” I asked him.

He tried to shake his head and managed only a slight wobble. He winced.
It was clear to me that the pain was coming back, just liked he'd
wanted. “Too much,” he said. “She . . . gives too much—” he gasped now,
and closed his eyes.

I must have been rather stupid that day, because I didn't get what he
meant right away. “Too much what?” I said.

Harry opened one pain-blearied eye. “Morphine,” he whispered.

I felt like a great shaft of light had hit me. “Overdose,” I said. “She
kills by overdose. And in a place like this, where it's actually almost
her job, nobody would question it—why, that's—”

Harry squeezed my hand again and I stopped babbling. “Don't let her,” he
said in a hoarse voice with surprising strength. “Don't let her—dope me
again.”

“Please,” Deborah said in a voice that hung on the ragged edge, “what
are you guys talking about?” I looked at Harry, but Harry closed his
eyes as a sudden stab of pain tore at him.

“He thinks, um . . . ,” I started and then trailed off. Deborah had no
idea what I was, of course, and Harry had told me quite firmly to keep
her in the dark. So how I could tell her about this without revealing
anything was something of a problem. “He thinks the nurse is giving him
too much morphine,” I finally said. “On purpose.”

“That's crazy,” Deb said. “She's a nurse.”

Harry looked at her but didn't say anything. And to be truthful, I
couldn't think of anything to say to Deb's incredible naïveté either.

“What should I do?” I asked Harry.

Harry looked at me for a very long time. At first I thought his mind
might have wandered away with the pain, but as I looked back at him I
saw that Harry was very much present. His jaw was set so hard that I
thought the bones might snap through his tender pale skin and his eyes
were as clear and sharp as I had ever seen them, as much as when he had
first given me his Harry solution to getting me squared away. “Stop
her,” he said at last.

A very large thrill ran through me. Stop her? Was it possible? Could he
mean—/stop/ her? Until now Harry had helped me control my Dark
Passenger, feeding him stray pets, hunting deer; one glorious time I had
gone with him to catch a feral monkey that had been terrorizing a South
Miami neighborhood. It had been so close, so almost human—but still not
right, of course. And we had gone through all the theoretical steps of
stalking, disposing of evidence, and so on. Harry knew that someday It
would happen and he wanted me to be ready to do It right. He had always
held me back from actually Doing It. But now—stop her? Could he mean it?

“I'll go talk to the doctor,” Deborah said. “He'll tell her to adjust
your medicine.”

I opened my mouth to speak, but Harry squeezed my hand and nodded once,
painfully. “Go,” he said, and Deborah looked at him for a moment before
she turned away and went to find the doctor. When she was gone the room
filled with a wild silence. I could think of nothing but what Harry had
said: “Stop her.” And I couldn't think of any other way to interpret it,
except that he was finally turning me loose, giving me permission to do
the Real Thing at last. But I didn't dare ask him if that's what he had
said for fear he would tell me he meant something else. And so I just
stood there for the longest time, staring out the small window into a
garden outside, where a splatter of red flowers surrounded a fountain.
Time passed. My mouth got dry. “Dexter—” Harry said at last.

I didn't answer. Nothing I could think of seemed adequate. “It's like
this,” Harry said, slowly and painfully, and my eyes jerked down to his.
He gave me a strained half smile when he saw that I was with him at
last. “I'll be gone soon,” Harry said. “I can't stop you from . . .
being who you are.”

“Being /what/ I am, Dad,” I said.

He waved it away with a feeble, brittle hand. “Sooner or later . . . you
will—/need/—to do it to a person,” he said, and I felt my blood sing at
the thought. “Somebody who . . . /needs/ it . . .”

“Like the nurse,” I said with a thick tongue.

“Yes,” he says, closing his eyes for a long moment, and when he went on
his voice had grown hazy with the pain. “She needs it, Dexter. That's—”
He took a ragged breath. I could hear his tongue clacking as if his
mouth was overdry. “She's deliberately—overdosing patients . . . killing
them . . . killing them . . . on purpose . . . She's a killer, Dexter .
. . A killer . . .”

I cleared my throat. I felt a little clumsy and light-headed, but after
all this was a very important moment in a young man's life. “Do you
want—” I said and stopped as my voice broke. “Is it all right if I . . .
stop her, Dad?”

“Yes,” said Harry. “Stop her.”

For some reason I felt like I had to be absolutely certain. “You mean,
you know. Like I've been doing? With, you know, the monkey?”

Harry's eyes were closed and he was clearly floating away on a rising
tide of pain. He took a soft and uneven breath. “Stop . . . the nurse,”
he said. “Like . . . the monkey . . .” His head arched back slightly,
and he began to breathe faster but still very roughly.

Well.

There it was.

“Stop the nurse like the monkey.” It had a certain wild ring to it. But
in my madly buzzing brain, everything was music. Harry was turning me
loose. I had permission. We had talked about one day doing this, but he
had held me back. Until now.

Now.

“We talked . . . about this,” Harry said, eyes still closed. “You know
what to do . . .”

“I talked to the doctor,” Deborah said, hurrying into the room. “He'll
come down and adjust the meds on the chart.”

“Good,” I said, feeling something rise up in me, from the base of my
spine and out over the top of my head, an electric surge that jolted
through me and covered me like a dark hood. “I'll go talk to the nurse.”

Deborah looked startled, perhaps at my tone. “Dexter—” she said.

I paused, fighting to control the savage glee I felt towering up inside
me. “I don't want any misunderstanding,” I said. My voice sounded
strange even to me. I pushed past Deborah before she could register my
expression.

And in the hallway of that hospice, threading my way between stacks of
clean, crisp, white linen, I felt the Dark Passenger become the new
driver for the first time. Dexter became understated, almost invisible,
the light-colored stripes on a sharp and transparent tiger. I blended
in, almost impossible to see, but I was there and I was stalking,
circling in the wind to find my prey. In that tremendous flash of
freedom, on my way to do the Thing for the first time, sanctioned by
almighty Harry, I receded, faded back into the scenery of my own dark
self, while the other me crouched and growled. I would do It at last, do
what I had been created to do.

And I did.

CHAPTER 17

AND I HAD. SO LONG AGO, YET THE MEMORY STILL pulsed in me. Of course,
I still had that first dry drop of blood on its slide. It was my first,
and I could call up that memory any time by taking out my little slide
and looking at it. I did, every so often. It had been a very special day
for Dexter. Last Nurse had been First Playmate, and she had opened up so
many wonderful doors for me. I had learned so much, found out so many
new things.

But why was I remembering Last Nurse now? Why did this whole series of
events seem to be whipping me back through time? I could not afford a
fond remembrance of my first pair of long pants. I needed to explode
into action, make large decisions, and begin important deeds. Instead of
strolling sappily down memory lane, wallowing in sweet memories of my
first blood slide.

Which, now that I thought of it, I had not collected from Jaworski. It
was the kind of tiny, absurdly unimportant detail that turned strong men
of action into fidgeting, whimpering neurotics. I /needed/ that slide.
Jaworski's death was useless without it. The whole idiotic episode was
now worse than a stupid and impulsive foolishness; it was incomplete. I
had no slide.

I shook my head, trying spastically to rattle two gray cells into the
same synapse. I half wanted to take my boat for an early-morning spin.
Perhaps the salt air would clear the stupidity from my skull. Or I could
head south to Turkey Point and hope that the radiation might mutate me
back into a rational creature. But instead, I made coffee. No slide,
indeed. It cheapened the whole experience. Without the slide, I might as
well have stayed home. Or almost, at any rate. There had been other
rewards. I smiled fondly, recalling the mix of moonlight and muffled
screams. Oh, what a madcap little monster I had been. An episode unlike
any of my others. It was good to break out of dull routine from time to
time. And there was Rita, of course, but I had no idea what to think
about that, so I didn't. Instead I thought of the cool breeze flowing
across the squirming little man who had liked to hurt children. It had
almost been a happy time. But of course, in ten years the memory would
fade, and without that slide I could not bring it back. I needed my
souvenir. Well, we would see.

While the coffee brewed, I checked for the newspaper, more out of hope
than expectation. It was rare for the paper to arrive before six-thirty,
and on Sundays it often came after eight. It was another clear example
of the disintegration of society that had so worried Harry. Really, now:
If you can't get me my newspaper on time, how can you expect me to
refrain from killing people?

No paper; no matter. Press coverage of my adventures had never been
terribly interesting to me. And Harry had warned me about the idiocy of
keeping any kind of scrapbook. He didn't need to; I rarely even glanced
at the reviews of my performances. This time was a little different, of
course, since I had been so impetuous and was mildly worried that I had
not covered my tracks properly. I was just a bit curious to see what
might be said about my accidental party. So I sat with my coffee for
about forty-five minutes until I heard the paper thump against the door.
I brought it in and flipped it open.

Whatever else one can say about journalists—and there is a very great
deal, almost an encyclopedia—they are very rarely troubled by memory.
The same paper that had so recently trumpeted COPS CORRAL KILLER now
screamed ICE MAN'S STORY MELTS! It was a long and lovely piece, very
dramatically written, detailing the discovery of a badly abused body at
a construction site just off Old Cutler Road. “A Metro Miami police
spokesperson”—meaning Detective LaGuerta, I was sure—said that it was
much too soon to say anything with certainty, but this was probably a
copycat killing. The paper had drawn its own conclusions—another thing
they are seldom shy about—and was now wondering aloud if the
distinguished gentleman in captivity, Mr. Daryll Earl McHale, was
actually, in fact, the killer. Or was the killer still at large, as
evidenced by this latest outrage upon public morality? Because, the
paper carefully pointed out, how could we believe that two such killers
could possibly be on the loose at the same time? It was very neatly
reasoned, and it occurred to me that if they had spent as much energy
and mental power trying to solve the murders, the whole thing would be
over by now.

But it was all very interesting reading, of course. And it certainly
made me speculate. Good heavens, was it really possible that this mad
animal was still running loose? Was anyone safe?

The telephone rang. I glanced at my wall clock; it was 6:45. It could
only be Deborah.

“I'm reading it now,” I said into the phone.

“You said bigger,” Deborah told me. “Splashier.”

“And this isn't?” I asked with great innocence.

“It's not even a hooker,” she said. “Some part-time janitor from Ponce
Junior High, chopped up at a construction site on Old Cutler. What the
hell, Dexter?”

“You did know I'm not perfect, didn't you, Deborah?”

“It doesn't even fit the pattern—where's the cold you said would be
there? What happened to the small space?”

“It's Miami, Deb, people will steal anything.”

“It's not even a copycat,” she said. “It isn't anything like the others.
Even LaGuerta got that right. She's already said so in print. Damn it
all, Dexter. My butt is way out in the wind here, and this is just some
random slasher, or a drug thing.”

“It hardly seems fair to blame me for all that.”

“Goddamn it, Dex,” she said, and hung up.

The early-morning TV shows spent a full ninety seconds on the shocking
discovery of the shattered body. Channel 7 had the best adjectives. But
nobody knew any more than the paper. They radiated outrage and a grim
sense of disaster that even carried over into the weather forecast, but
I'm sure a large part of it was caused by the lack of pictures.

Another beautiful Miami day. Mutilated corpses with a chance of
afternoon showers. I got dressed and went to work.

I admit I had a minor ulterior motive in heading for the office so
early, and I beefed it up by stopping for pastries. I bought two
crullers, an apple fritter, and a cinnamon roll the size of my spare
tire. I ate the fritter and one cruller as I cheerfully threaded through
the lethal traffic. I don't know how I get away with eating so many
doughnuts. I don't gain weight or get pimples, and although that may
seem unfair, I can't find it in my heart to complain. I came out
reasonably well in the genetic crapshoot: high metabolism, good size and
strength, all of which helped me in my hobby. And I have been told that
I am not awful to look at, which I believe is meant to be a compliment.

I also didn't need a great deal of sleep, which was nice this morning. I
had hoped to arrive early enough to beat Vince Masuoka to work, and it
seemed that I had. His office was dark when I got there, clutching my
white paper bag for camouflage—but my visit had nothing whatever to do
with doughnuts. I scanned his work area quickly, looking for the
telltale evidence box labeled JAWORSKI and yesterday's date.

I found it and quickly lifted out a few tissue samples. There might be
enough. I pulled on a pair of latex gloves and in a moment had pressed
the samples to my clean glass slide. I do realize how stupid it was to
take yet another risk, but I had to have my slide.

I had just tucked it away in a ziplock baggie when I heard him come in
behind me. I quickly put things back in place and whirled to face the
door, as Vince came through and saw me.

“My God,” I said. “You move so silently. So you /have/ had ninja training.”

“I have two older brothers,” Vince said. “It's the same thing.”

I held up the white paper bag and bowed. “Master, I bring a gift.”

He looked at the bag curiously. “May Buddha bless you, grasshopper. What
is it?”

I tossed him the bag. It hit him in the chest and slid to the floor. “So
much for ninja training,” I said.

“My finely tuned body needs coffee to function,” Vince told me, bending
to retrieve the bag. “What's in here? That hurt.” He reached into the
bag, frowning. “It better not be body parts.” He pulled out the huge
cinnamon roll and eyed it. “Ay, caramba. My village will not starve this
year. We are very grateful, grasshopper.” He bowed, holding up the
pastry. “A debt repaid is a blessing on us all, my child.”

“In that case,” I said, “do you have the case file on the one they found
last night off Old Cutler?”

Vince took a big bite of cinnamon roll. His lips gleamed with frosting
as he slowly chewed. “Mmmpp,” he said, and swallowed. “Are we feeling
left out?”

“If we means Deborah, yes we are,” I said. “I told her I'd take a look
at the file for her.”

“Wulf,” he said, mouth full of pastry, “merf pluddy uh bud is nime.”

“Forgive me, master,” I said. “Your language is strange to me.”

He chewed and swallowed. “I said, at least there's plenty of blood this
time. But you're still a wallflower. Bradley got the call for this one.”

“Can I see the file?”

He took a bite. “Ee waf awife—”

“Very true, I'm sure. And in English?”

Vince swallowed. “I said, he was still alive when his leg came off.”

“Human beings are so resilient, aren't they?”

Vince stuck the whole pastry in his mouth and picked up the file,
holding it out to me and taking a large bite of the roll at the same
time. I grabbed the folder.

“I've got to go,” I said. “Before you try to talk again.”

He pulled the roll from his mouth. “Too late,” he said.

I walked slowly back to my little cubbyhole, glancing at the contents of
the folder. Gervasio César Martez had discovered the body. His statement
was on top of the folder. He was a security guard, employed by Sago
Security Systems. He had worked for them for fourteen months and had no
criminal record. Martez had found the body at approximately 10:17 PM and
immediately made a quick search of the area before calling police. He
wanted to catch the /pendejo/ who had done this thing because no one
should do such things and they had done it when he, Gervasio, was on the
job. That was like they had done it to him, you know? So he would catch
the monster himself. But this had not been possible. There was no sign
of the perpetrator, not anywhere, and so he had called the police.

The poor man had taken it personally. I shared his outrage. Such
brutality should not be allowed. Of course, I was also very grateful
that his sense of honor had given me time to get away. And here I had
always thought morality was useless.

I turned the corner into my dark little room and walked right into
Detective LaGuerta. “Hah,” she said. “You don't see so good.” But she
didn't move.

“I'm not a morning person,” I told her. “My biorhythms are all off until
noon.”

She looked up at me from an inch away. “They look okay to me,” she said.

I slid around her to my desk. “Can I make some small contribution to the
full majesty of the law this morning?” I asked her.

She stared at me. “You have a message,” she said. “On your machine.”

I looked over at my answering machine. Sure enough, the light was
blinking. The woman really was a detective.

“It's some girl,” LaGuerta said. “She sounds kind of sleepy and happy.
You got a girlfriend, Dexter?” There was a strange hint of challenge in
her voice.

“You know how it is,” I said. “Women today are so forward, and when you
are as handsome as I am they absolutely fling themselves at your head.”
Perhaps an unfortunate choice of words; as I said it I couldn't help
thinking of the woman's head flung at me not so long ago.

“Watch out,” LaGuerta said. “Sooner or later one of them will stick.” I
had no idea what she thought that meant, but it was a very unsettling image.

“I'm sure you're right,” I said. “Until then, carpe diem.”

“What?”

“It's Latin,” I said. “It means, complain in daylight.”

“What have you got about this thing last night?” she said suddenly.

I held up the case file. “I was just looking at it,” I said.

“It's not the same,” she said, frowning. “No matter what those asshole
reporters say. McHale is guilty. He confessed. This one is not the same.”

“I guess it seems like too much of a coincidence,” I said. “Two brutal
killers at the same time.”

LaGuerta shrugged. “It's Miami, what do they think? Here is where these
guys come on vacation. There's lots of bad guys out there. I can't catch
them all.”

To be truthful, she couldn't catch any of them unless they hurled
themselves off a building and into the front seat of her car, but this
didn't seem like a good time to bring that up. LaGuerta stepped closer
to me and flicked the folder with a dark red fingernail. “I need you to
find something here, Dexter. To show it's not the same.”

A light dawned. She was getting unpleasant pressure, probably from
Captain Matthews, a man who believed what he read in the papers as long
as they spelled his name right. And she needed some ammunition to fight
back. “Of course it's not the same,” I said. “But why come to me?”

She stared at me for a moment through half-closed eyes, a curious
effect. I think I had seen the same stare in some of the movies Rita had
dragged me to see, but why on earth Detective LaGuerta had turned the
look on me I couldn't say. “I let you in the seventy-two-hour briefing,”
she said. “Even though Doakes wants you dead, I let you stay.”

“Thank you very much.”

“Because you have a feeling for these things sometimes. The serial ones.
That's what they all say. Dexter has a feeling sometimes.”

“Oh, really,” I said, “just a lucky guess once or twice.”

“And I need somebody in the lab who can find something.”

“Then why not ask Vince?”

“He's not so cute,” she said. “You find something.”

She was still uncomfortably close, so close I could smell her shampoo.
“I'll find something,” I said.

She nodded at the answering machine. “You gonna call her back? You don't
have time for chasing pussy.”

She still hadn't backed up, and it took me a moment to realize she was
talking about the message on my machine. I gave her my very best
political smile. “I think it's chasing me, Detective.”

“Hah. You got that right.” She gave me a long look, then turned and
walked away.

I don't know why, but I watched her go. I really couldn't think of
anything else to do. Just before she passed out of sight around the
corner, she smoothed her skirt across her hips and turned to look at me.
Then she was gone, off into the vague mysteries of Homicidal Politics.

And me? Poor dear dazed Dexter? What else could I do? I sank into my
office chair and pushed the play button on my answering machine. “Hi,
Dexter. It's me.” Of course it was. And as odd as it was, the slow,
slightly raspy voice sounded like “me” was Rita. “Mm . . . I was
thinking about last night. Call me, mister.” As LaGuerta had observed,
she sounded kind of tired and happy. Apparently I had a real girlfriend now.

Where would the madness end?

CHAPTER 18

FOR A FEW MOMENTS I JUST SAT AND THOUGHT about life's cruel ironies.
After so many years of solitary self-reliance, I was suddenly pursued
from all directions by hungry women. Deb, Rita, LaGuerta—they were all
apparently unable to exist without me. Yet the one person I wanted to
spend some quality time with was being coy, leaving Barbie dolls in my
freezer. Was any of this fair?

I put my hand in my pocket and felt the small glass slide, snug and
secure in its ziplock. For a moment it made me feel a little better. At
least I was doing something. And life's only obligation, after all, was
to be interesting, which it certainly was at the moment. “Interesting”
did not begin to describe it. I would trade a year off my life to find
out more about this elusive will-o'-the-wisp who was teasing me so
mercilessly with such elegant work. In fact, I had come far too close to
trading more than a year with my little Jaworski interlude.

Yes, things were certainly interesting. And were they really saying in
the department that I had a feeling for serial homicide? That was very
troubling. It meant my careful disguise might be close to unraveling. I
had been too good too many times. It could become a problem. But what
could I do? Be stupid for a while? I wasn't sure I knew how, even after
so many years of careful observation.

Ah, well. I opened the case file on Jaworski, the poor man. After an
hour of study, I came to a couple of conclusions. First, and most
important, I was going to get away with it, in spite of the unforgivable
sloppy impulsiveness of the thing. And second—there might be a way for
Deb to cash in on this. If she could prove this was the work of our
original artist while LaGuerta committed herself to the copycat theory,
Deb could suddenly turn from somebody they didn't trust to get their
coffee into flavor of the month. Of course, it was not actually the work
of the same guy, but that seemed like a very picky objection at this
point. And since I knew without any possibility of doubt that there were
going to be more bodies found very soon, it wasn't worth worrying about.

And naturally, at the same time, I had to provide the annoying Detective
LaGuerta with enough rope to hang herself. Which might also, it occurred
to me, come in handy on a more personal level. Pushed into a corner and
made to look like an idiot, LaGuerta would naturally try to pin the
blame on the nitwit lab tech who had given her the erroneous
conclusion—dull dim Dexter. And my reputation would suffer a much-needed
relapse into mediocrity. Of course, it would not jeopardize my job,
since I was supposed to analyze blood spatter, not provide profiling
services. That being the case, it would help to make LaGuerta look like
the nitwit she was, and raise Deborah's stock even more.

Lovely when things work out so neatly. I called Deborah.

At half-past one the next day I met Deb at a small restaurant a few
blocks north of the airport. It was tucked into a little strip mall,
between an auto parts store and a gun shop. It was a place we both knew
well, not too far from Miami-Dade Headquarters, and they made the best
Cuban sandwiches in the world right there. Perhaps that seems like a
small thing, but I assure you there are times when only a /medianoche/
will do, and at such times Café Relampago was the only place to get one.
The Morgans had been going there since 1974.

And I did feel that some small light touch was in order—if not an actual
celebration, then at least an acknowledgment that things were looking up
ever so slightly. Perhaps I was merely feeling chipper because I had let
off a little steam with my dear friend Jaworski, but in any case I did
feel unaccountably good. I even ordered a /batido de mamé/, a uniquely
flavored Cuban milk shake that tastes something like a combination of
watermelon, peach, and mango.

Deb, of course, was unable to share my irrational mood. She looked like
she had been studying the facial expressions of large fish, dour and
droopy in the extreme.

“Please, Deborah,” I begged her, “if you don't stop, your face will be
stuck like that. People will take you for a grouper.”

“They're sure not going to take me for a cop,” she said. “Because I
won't be one anymore.”

“Nonsense,” I said. “Didn't I promise?”

“Yeah. You also promised that this was going to work. But you didn't say
anything about the looks I'd get from Captain Matthews.”

“Oh, Deb,” I said. “He /looked/ at you? I'm so sorry.”

“Fuck you, Dexter. You weren't there, and it's not your life going down
the tubes.”

“I told you it was going to be rough for a while, Debs.”

“Well at least you were right about that. According to Matthews, I am
this close to being suspended.”

“But he did give you permission to use your free time to look into this
a little more?”

She snorted. “He said, ‘I can't stop you, Morgan. But I am very
disappointed. And I wonder what your father would have said.'”

“And did you say, ‘My father never would have closed the case with the
wrong guy in jail'?”

She looked surprised. “No,” she said. “But I was thinking it. How did
you know?”

“But you didn't actually /say/ it, did you, Deborah?”

“No,” she said.

I pushed her glass toward her. “Have some /mamé/, sis. Things are
looking up.”

She looked at me. “You sure you're not just yanking my chain?”

“Never, Deb. How could I?”

“With the greatest of ease.”

“Really, sis. You need to trust me.”

She held my eye for a moment and then looked down. She still hadn't
touched her shake, which was a shame. They were very good. “I trust you.
But I swear to God I don't know why.” She looked up at me, a strange
expression flitting back and forth across her face. “And sometimes I
really don't think I should, Dexter.”

I gave her my very best reassuring big-brother smile. “Within the next
two or three days something new will turn up. I promise.”

“You can't know that,” she said.

“I know I can't, Deb. But I do know. I really do.”

“So why do you sound so happy about it?”

I wanted to say it was because the idea made me happy. Because the
thought of seeing more of the bloodless wonder made me happier than
anything else I could think of. But of course, that was not a sentiment
Deb could really share with me, so I kept it to myself. “Naturally, I'm
just happy for you.”

She snorted. “That's right, I forgot,” she said. But at least she took a
sip of her shake.

“Listen,” I said, “either LaGuerta is right—”

“Which means I'm dead and fucked.”

“Or LaGuerta is /wrong/, and you are alive and virginal. With me so far,
sis?”

“Mmm,” she said, remarkably grumpy considering how patient I was being.

“If you were a betting gal, would you bet on LaGuerta being right? About
anything?”

“Maybe about fashion,” she said. “She dresses really nice.”

The sandwiches came. The waiter dropped them sourly in the middle of the
table without a word and whirled away behind the counter. Still, they
were very good sandwiches. I don't know what made them better than all
the other /medianoches/ in town, but they were; bread crisp on the
outside and soft on the inside, just the right balance of pork and
pickle, cheese melted perfectly—pure bliss. I took a big bite. Deborah
played with the straw in her shake.

I swallowed. “Debs, if my deadly logic can't cheer you up, and one of
Relampago's sandwiches can't cheer you up, then it's too late. You're
already dead.”

She looked at me with her grouper face and took a bite of her sandwich.
“It's very good,” she said without expression. “See me cheer up?”

The poor thing was not convinced, which was a terrible blow to my ego.
But after all, I had fed her on a traditional Morgan family delight. And
I had brought her wonderful news, even if she didn't recognize it as
such. If all this had not actually made her smile—well, really. I
couldn't be expected to do everything.

One other small thing I could do, though, was to feed LaGuerta,
too—something not quite as palatable as one of Relampago's sandwiches,
though delicious in its own way. And so that afternoon I called on the
good detective in her office, a lovely little cubby in the corner of a
large room containing half a dozen other little cubbies. Hers, of
course, was the most elegant, with several very tasteful photographs of
herself with celebrities hanging from the fabric of the partitions. I
recognized Gloria Estefan, Madonna, and Jorge Mas Canosa. On the desk,
on the far side of a jade-green blotter with a leather frame, stood an
elegant green onyx pen holder with a quartz clock in the center.

LaGuerta was on the telephone speaking rapid-fire Spanish when I came
in. She glanced up at me without seeing me and looked away. But after a
moment, her eyes came back to me. This time she looked me over
thoroughly, frowned, and said, “Okay-okay. 'Ta luo,” which was Cuban for
/hasta luego/. She hung up and continued to look at me.

“What have you got for me?” she said finally.

“Glad tidings,” I told her.

“If that means good news, I could use some.”

I hooked a folding chair with my foot and dragged it into her cubby.
“There is no possible doubt,” I said, sitting in the folding chair,
“that you have the right guy in jail. The murder on Old Cutler was
committed by a different hand.”

She just looked at me for a moment. I wondered if it took her that long
to process the data and respond. “You can back that up?” she asked me at
last. “For sure?”

Of course I could back it up for sure, but I wasn't going to, no matter
how good confession might be for the soul. Instead, I dropped the folder
onto her desk. “The facts speak for themselves,” I said. “There's
absolutely no question about it.” And of course there wasn't any
question at all, as only I knew very well. “Look—” I told her, and
pulled out a page of carefully selected comparisons I had typed out.
“First, this victim is male. All the others were female. This victim was
found off Old Cutler. All of McHale's victims were off Tamiami Trail.
This victim was found relatively intact, and in the spot where he was
killed. McHale's victims were completely chopped up, and they were moved
to a different location for disposal.”

I went on, and she listened carefully. The list was a good one. It had
taken me several hours to come up with the most obvious, ludicrous,
transparently foolish comparisons, and I must say I did a very good job.
And LaGuerta did her part wonderfully, too. She bought the whole thing.
Of course, she was hearing what she wanted to hear.

“To sum up,” I said, “this new murder has the fingerprint of a revenge
killing, probably drug related. The guy in jail did the other murders
and they are absolutely, positively, 100 percent finished and over
forever. Never happen again. Case closed.” I dropped the folder on her
desk and held out my list.

She took the paper from me and looked at it for a long moment. She
frowned. Her eyes moved up and down the page a few times. One corner of
her lower lip twitched. Then she placed it carefully on her desk under a
heavy jade-green stapler.

“Okay,” she said, straightening the stapler so it was perfectly aligned
with the edge of her blotter. “Okay. Pretty good. This should help.” She
looked at me again with her frown of concentration still stitched in
place, and then suddenly smiled. “Okay. Thank you, Dexter.”

It was such an unexpected and genuine smile that if I only had a soul
I'm sure I would have felt quite guilty.

She stood, still smiling, and before I could retreat she had flung her
arms around my neck to give me a hug. “I really do appreciate it,” she
said. “You make me feel—VERY grateful.” And she rubbed her body against
mine in a way that could only be called suggestive. Surely there could
be no question of— I mean, here she was, a defender of public morality,
and yet right here in public—and even in the privacy of a bank vault I
would have been truly uninterested in being rubbed by her body. Not to
mention the fact that I had just handed her a rope with the hope that
she would use it to hang herself, which hardly seemed like the sort of
thing one would celebrate by— Well really, had the whole world gone mad?
What is it with humans? Is this all any of them ever thinks about?

Feeling something very close to panic, I tried to disentangle myself.
“Please, Detective—”

“Call me Migdia,” she said, clinging and rubbing harder. She reached a
hand down to the front of my pants and I jumped. On the plus side, my
action dislodged the amorous detective. On the negative side, she spun
sideways, hit the desk with her hip, and tripped over her chair, landing
sprawled out on the floor.

“I, ah—I really have to get back to work,” I stammered. “There's an
important, ah—” However, I couldn't think of anything more important
than running for my life, so I backed out of the cubicle, leaving her
looking after me.

It didn't seem to be a particularly friendly look.

CHAPTER 19

I WOKE UP STANDING AT THE SINK WITH THE WATER running. I had a moment
of total panic, a sense of complete disorientation, my heart racing
while my crusty eyelids fluttered in an attempt to catch up. The place
was wrong. The sink didn't look right. I wasn't even sure who I was—in
my dream I had been standing in front of my sink with the water running,
but it had not been this sink. I had been scrubbing my hands, working
the soap hard, cleansing my skin of every microscopic fleck of horrible
red blood, washing it away with water so hot it left my skin pink and
new and antiseptic. And the hot of the water bit harder after the cool
of the room I had just left behind me; the playroom, the killing room,
the room of dry and careful cutting.

I turned off the water and stood for a moment, swaying against the cold
sink. It had all been far too real, too little like any kind of dream I
knew about. And I remembered so clearly the room. I could see it just by
closing my eyes.

/I am standing above the woman, watching her flex and bulge against the
tape that holds her, seeing the living terror grow in her dull eyes,
seeing it blossom into hopelessness, and I feel the great surge of
wonder rise up in me and flow down my arm to the knife. And as I lift
the knife to begin—/

/But this is not the beginning. Because under the table there is another
one, already dry and neatly wrapped. And in the far corner there is one
more, waiting her turn with a hopeless black dread unlike anything I
have ever seen before even though it is somehow familiar and necessary,
this release of all other possibility so complete it washes me with a
clean and pure energy more intoxicating than—/

/Three./

/There are three of them this time./

I opened my eyes. It was me in the mirror. Hello, Dexter. Had a dream,
old chap? Interesting, wasn't it? Three of them, hey? But just a dream.
Nothing more. I smiled at me, trying out the face muscles, completely
unconvinced. And as rapturous as it had been, I was awake now and left
with nothing more than a hangover and wet hands.

What should have been a pleasant interlude in my subconscious had me
shaking, uncertain. I was filled with dread at the thought that my mind
had skipped town and left me behind to pay the rent. I thought of the
three carefully trussed playmates and wanted to go back to them and
continue. I thought of Harry and knew I couldn't. I was whipsawed
between a memory and a dream, and I couldn't tell which was more compelling.

This was just no fun anymore. I wanted my brain back.

I dried my hands and went to bed again, but there was no sleep left in
this night for dear decimated Dexter. I simply lay on my back and
watched the dark pools flowing across the ceiling until the telephone
rang at a quarter to six.

“You were right,” Deb said when I picked up.

“It's a wonderful feeling,” I said with a great effort at being my usual
bright self. “Right about what?”

“All of it,” Deb told me. “I'm at a crime scene on Tamiami Trail. And
guess what?”

“I was right?”

“It's him, Dexter. It has to be. And it's a whole hell of a lot
splashier, too.”

“Splashier how, Deb?” I asked, thinking /three bodies/, hoping she
wouldn't say it and thrilled by the certainty that she would.

“There appear to be multiple victims,” she said.

A jolt went through me, from my stomach straight up, as if I had
swallowed a live battery. But I made a huge effort to rally with
something typically clever. “This is wonderful, Deb. You're talking just
like a homicide report.”

“Yeah, well. I'm starting to feel like I might write one someday. I'm
just glad it won't be this one. It's too weird. LaGuerta doesn't know
what to think.”

“Or even how. What's weird about it, Deb?”

“I gotta go,” she said abruptly. “Get out here, Dexter. You have to see
this.”

By the time I got there the crowd was three deep around the barrier, and
most of them were reporters. It is always hard work to push through a
crowd of reporters with the scent of blood in their nostrils. You might
not think so, since on camera they appear to be brain-damaged wimps with
severe eating disorders. But put them at a police barricade and a
miraculous thing happens. They become strong, aggressive, willing and
able to shove anything and anyone out of the way and trample them
underfoot. It's a bit like the stories about aged mothers lifting trucks
when their child is trapped underneath. The strength comes from some
mysterious place—and somehow, when there is gore on the ground, these
anorexic creatures can push their way through anything. Without mussing
their hair, too.

Luckily for me, one of the uniforms at the barricade recognized me. “Let
him through, folks,” he told the reporters. “Let him through.”

“Thanks, Julio,” I told the cop. “Seems like more reporters every year.”

He snorted. “Somebody must be cloning 'em. They all look the same to me.”

I stepped under the yellow tape and as I straightened on the far side I
had the odd sensation that someone was tampering with the oxygen content
of Miami's atmosphere. I stood in the broken dirt of a construction
site. They were building what would probably be a three-story office
building, the kind inhabited by marginal developers. And as I stepped
slowly forward, following the activity around the half-built structure,
I knew it was not coincidence that we had all been brought here. Nothing
was coincidence with this killer. Everything was deliberate, carefully
measured for aesthetic impact, explored for artistic necessity.

We were at a construction site because it was necessary. He was making
his statement as I had told Deborah he would. /You got the wrong guy,/
he was saying. /You locked up a cretin because you are all cretins. You
are too stupid to see it unless I rub your noses in it; so here goes/.

But more than that, more than his message to the police and the public,
he was talking to me; taunting me, teasing me by quoting a passage from
my own hurried work. He had brought the bodies to a construction site
because I had taken Jaworski at a construction site. He was playing
catch with me, showing all of us just how good he was and telling one of
us—me—that he was watching. /I know what you did, and I can do it, too.
Better/.

I suppose that should have worried me a little.

It didn't.

It made me feel almost giddy, like a high-school girl watching as the
captain of the football team worked up his nerve to ask for a date. You
mean me? Little old me? Oh my stars, really? Pardon me while I flutter
my eyelashes.

I took a deep breath and tried to remind myself that I was a good girl
and I didn't do those things. But I knew /he/ did them, and I truly
wanted to go out with him. Please, Harry?

Because far beyond simply doing some interesting things with a new
friend, I needed to find this killer. I had to see him, talk to him,
prove to myself that he was real and that—

That what?

That he wasn't me?

That I was not the one doing such terrible, interesting things?

Why would I think that? It was beyond stupid; it was completely unworthy
of the attention of my once-proud brain. Except—now that the idea was
actually rattling around in there, I couldn't get the thought to sit
down and behave. What if it really was me? What if I had somehow done
these things without knowing it? Impossible, of course, absolutely
impossible, but—

I wake up at the sink, washing blood off my hands after a “dream” in
which I carefully and gleefully got blood all over my hands doing things
I ordinarily only dream about doing. Somehow I know things about the
whole string of murders, things I couldn't possibly know unless—

Unless nothing. Take a tranquilizer, Dexter. Start again. Breathe, you
silly creature; in with the good air, out with the bad. It was nothing
but one more symptom of my recent feeble-mindedness. I was merely going
prematurely senile from the strain of all my clean living. Granted I had
experienced one or two moments of human stupidity in the last few weeks.
So what? It didn't necessarily prove that I was human. Or that I had
been creative in my sleep.

No, of course not. Quite right; it meant nothing of the kind. So,
um—what did it mean?

I had assumed I was simply going crazy, dropping several handfuls of
marbles into the recycle bin. Very comforting—but if I was ready to
assume that, why not admit that it was possible I had committed a series
of delightful little pranks without remembering them, except as
fragmented dreams? Was insanity really easier to accept than
unconsciousness? After all, it was just a heightened form of
sleepwalking. “Sleep murder.” Probably very common. Why not? I already
gave away the driver's seat of my consciousness on a regular basis when
the Dark Passenger went joyriding. It really wasn't such a great leap to
accept that the same thing was happening here, now, in a slightly
different form. The Dark Passenger was simply borrowing the car while I
slept.

How else to explain it? That I was astrally projecting while I slept and
just happened to tune my vibrations to the killer's aura because of our
connection in a past life? Sure, that might make sense—if this was
southern California. In Miami, it seemed a bit thin. And so if I went
into this half building and happened to see three bodies arranged in a
way that seemed to be speaking to me, I would have to consider the
possibility that I had written the message. Didn't that make more sense
than believing I was on some kind of subconscious party line?

I had come to the outside stairwell of the building. I stopped there for
a moment and closed my eyes, leaning against the bare concrete block of
the wall. It was slightly cooler than the air, and rough. I ground my
cheek against it, somewhere between pleasure and pain. No matter how
much I wanted to go upstairs and see what there was to see, I wanted
just as much not to see it at all.

/Talk to me/, I whispered to the Dark Passenger. /Tell me what you have
done/.

But of course there was no answer, beyond the usual cool, distant
chuckle. And that was no actual help. I felt a little sick, slightly
dizzy, uncertain, and I did not like this feeling of having feelings. I
took three long breaths, straightened up and opened my eyes.

Sergeant Doakes stared at me from three feet away, just inside the
stairwell, one foot on the first step. His face was a dark carved mask
of curious hostility, like a rottweiler that wants to rip your arms off
but is mildly interested in knowing first what flavor you might be. And
there was something in his expression that I had never seen on anybody's
face before, except in the mirror. It was a deep and abiding emptiness
that had seen through the comic-strip charade of human life and read the
bottom line.

“Who are you talkin' to?” he asked me with his bright hungry teeth
showing. “You got somebody else in there with you?”

His words and the knowing way he said them cut right through me and
turned my insides to jelly. Why choose those words? What did he mean by
“in there with me”? Could he possibly know about the Dark Passenger?
Impossible! Unless . . .

Doakes knew me for what I was.

Just as I had known Last Nurse.

The Thing Inside calls out across the emptiness when it sees its own
kind. Was Sergeant Doakes carrying a Dark Passenger, too? How could it
be possible? A homicide sergeant, a Dexter-dark predator? Unthinkable.
But how else to explain? I could think of nothing and for much too long
I just stared at him. He stared back.

Finally he shook his head, without looking away from me. “One of these
days,” he said. “You and me.”

“I'll take a rain check,” I told him with all the good cheer I could
muster. “In the meantime, if you'll excuse me . . . ?”

He stood there taking up the entire stairwell and just staring. But
finally he nodded slightly and moved to one side. “One of these days,”
he said again as I pushed past him and onto the stairs.

The shock of this encounter had snapped me instantly out of my sniveling
little self-involved funk. Of course I wasn't committing unconscious
murders. Aside from the pure ridiculousness of the idea, it would be an
unthinkable waste to do these things and not remember. There would be
some other explanation, something simple and cold. Surely I was not the
only one within the sound of my voice capable of this kind of
creativity. After all, I was in Miami, surrounded by dangerous creatures
like Sergeant Doakes.

I went quickly up the stairs, feeling the adrenaline rushing through me,
almost myself again. There was a healthy spring in my step that was only
partly because I was escaping the good sergeant. Even more, I was eager
to see this most recent assault on the public welfare—natural curiosity,
nothing more. I certainly wasn't going to find any of my own fingerprints.

I climbed the stairs to the second floor. Some of the framing had been
knocked into place, but most of the floor was still without walls. As I
stepped off the landing and onto the main area of the floor, I saw
Angel-no-relation squatting in the center of the floor, unmoving. His
elbows were planted on his knees, his hands cupped his face, and he was
just staring. I stopped and looked at him, startled. It was one of the
most remarkable things I had ever seen, a Miami homicide technician
swatted into immobility by what he had found at a crime scene.

And what he had found was even more interesting.

It was a scene out of some dark melodrama, a vaudeville for vampires.
Just as there had been at the site where I had taken Jaworski, there was
a stack of shrink-wrapped drywall. It had been pushed over against a
wall and was now flooded with light from the construction lights and a
few more the investigating team had set up.

On top of the drywall, raised up like an altar, was a black portable
workbench. It had been neatly centered so the light hit it just right—or
rather, so the light illuminated just right the thing that sat on top of
the workbench.

It was, of course, a woman's head. Its mouth held the rearview mirror
from some car or truck, which stretched the face into an almost comical
look of surprise.

Above it and to the left was a second head. The body of a Barbie doll
had been placed under its chin so it looked like a huge head with a tiny
body.

On the right side was the third head. It had been neatly mounted on a
piece of drywall, the ears carefully tacked on with what must be drywall
screws. There was no mess of blood puddling around the exhibit. All
three heads were bloodless.

A mirror, a Barbie, and drywall.

Three kills.

Bone dry.

Hello, Dexter.

 

There was absolutely no question about it. The Barbie body was clearly a
reference to the one in my freezer. The mirror was from the head left on
the causeway, and the drywall referred to Jaworski. Either someone was
so far inside my head they might as well be me, or they actually were me.

I took a slow and very ragged breath. I'm quite sure my emotions were
not the same as his, but I wanted to squat down in the middle of the
floor beside Angel-no-relation. I needed a moment to remember how to
think, and the floor seemed a great place to start. Instead, I found
myself moving slowly toward the altar, pulled forward as if I was on
well-oiled rails. I could not make myself stop or slow down or do
anything but move closer. I could only look, marvel, and concentrate on
getting the breath to come in and go out in the right place. And all
around me I slowly became aware that I was not the only one who couldn't
quite believe what he was seeing.

In the course of my job—to say nothing of my hobby—I had been on the
scene of hundreds of murders, many of them so gruesome and savage that
they shocked even me. And at each and every one of those murders the
Miami-Dade team had set up and gone on with their job in a relaxed and
professional manner. At each and every one of them someone had been
slurping coffee, someone had sent out for /pasteles/ or doughnuts,
someone was joking or gossiping as she sponged up the gore. At each and
every crime scene I had seen a group of people who were so completely
unimpressed with the carnage that they might as well have been bowling
with the church league.

Until now.

This time the large, bare concrete room was unnaturally quiet. The
officers and technicians stood in silent groups of two and three, as if
afraid to be alone, and simply looked at what had been displayed at the
far end of the room. If anybody accidentally made a small sound,
everyone jumped and glared at the noisemaker. The whole scene was so
positively comically strange that I certainly would have laughed out
loud if I hadn't been just as busy staring as all the other geeks.

Had I done this?

It was beautiful—in a terrible sort of way, of course. But still, the
arrangement was perfect, compelling, beautifully bloodless. It showed
great wit and a wonderful sense of composition. Somebody had gone to a
lot of trouble to make this into a real work of art. Somebody with
style, talent, and a morbid sense of playfulness. In my whole life I had
only known of one such somebody.

Could that somebody possibly be darkly dreaming Dexter?

CHAPTER 20

I STOOD AS CLOSE AS I COULD GET TO THE TABLEAU without actually
touching it, just looking. The little altar had not been dusted for
prints yet; nothing had been done to it at all, although I assumed
pictures had been taken. And oh how I wanted a copy of one of those
pictures to take home. Poster sized, and in full, bloodless color. If I
/had/ done this, I was a much better artist than I had ever suspected.
Even from this close the heads seemed to float in space, suspended above
the mortal earth in a timeless, bloodless parody of paradise, literally
cut off from their bodies—

Their bodies: I glanced around. There was no sign of them, no telltale
stack of carefully wrapped packages. There was only the pyramid of heads.

I stared some more. After a few moments Vince Masuoka swam slowly over,
his mouth open, his face pale. “Dexter,” he said, and shook his head.

“Hello, Vince,” I said. He shook his head again. “Where are the bodies?”

He just stared at the heads for a long moment. Then he looked at me with
a face full of lost innocence. “Somewhere else,” he said.

There was a clatter on the stairs and the spell was broken. I moved away
from the tableau as LaGuerta came in with a few carefully selected
reporters—Nick Something and Rick Sangre from local TV, and Eric the
Viking, a strange and respected columnist from the newspaper. For a
moment the room was very busy. Nick and Eric took one look and ran back
down the stairs with their hands covering their mouths. Rick Sangre
frowned deeply, looked at the lights, and then turned to LaGuerta.

“Is there a power outlet? I gotta get my camera guy,” he said.

LaGuerta shook her head. “Wait for those other guys,” she said.

“I need pictures,” Rick Sangre insisted.

Sergeant Doakes appeared behind Sangre. The reporter looked around and
saw him. “No pictures,” Doakes said. Sangre opened his mouth, looked at
Doakes for a moment, and then closed his mouth again. Once again the
sterling qualities of the good sergeant had saved the day. He went back
and stood protectively by the displayed body parts, as if it was a
science-fair project and he was its guardian.

There was a strained coughing sound at the door, and Nick Something and
Eric the Viking returned, shuffling slowly up the stairs and back onto
the floor like old men. Eric wouldn't look at the far end of the room.
Nick tried not to look, but his head kept drifting around toward the
awful sight, and then he would snap it back to face LaGuerta again.

LaGuerta began to speak. I moved close enough to hear. “I asked you
three to come see this thing before we allow any official press
coverage,” she said.

“But we can cover it unofficially?” Rick Sangre interrupted.

LaGuerta ignored him. “We don't want any wild speculation in the press
about what has happened here,” she said. “As you can see, this is a
vicious and bizarre crime—” she paused for a moment and then said very
carefully, “Unlike Anything We Have Ever Seen Before.” You could
actually hear her capitalize the letters.

Nick Something said, “Huh,” and looked thoughtful. Eric the Viking got
it immediately. “Whoa, wait a minute,” he said. “You're saying this is a
brand-new killer? A whole different set of murders?”

LaGuerta looked at him with great significance. “Of course it's too soon
to say anything for sure,” she said, sounding sure, “but let's look at
this thing logically, okay? First,” she held up a finger, “we got a guy
who confessed the other stuff. He's in jail, and we didn't let him out
to do this. Second, this doesn't look like anything I ever saw, does it?
'Cause there's three and they're stacked up all pretty, okay?” Bless her
heart, she had noticed.

“Why can't I get my camera guy?” Rick Sangre asked.

“Wasn't there a mirror found at one of the other murders?” Eric the
Viking said weakly, trying very hard not to look.

“Have you identified the, uh—” Nick Something said. His head started to
turn toward the display and he caught himself, snapped back around to
LaGuerta. “Are the victims prostitutes, Detective?”

“Listen,” LaGuerta said. She sounded a little annoyed, and a small trace
of Cuban accent showed in her voice for just a second. “Let me /esplain/
something. I don't care if they're prostitutes. I don't care if they got
a mirror. I don't care about any of that.” She took a breath and went
on, much calmer. “We got the other killer locked up in the jail. We've
got a confession. This is a whole new thing, okay? That's the important
thing. You can see it—this is different.”

“Then why are you assigned to it?” asked Eric the Viking, very
reasonably, I thought.

LaGuerta showed shark teeth. “I solved the other one,” she said.

“But you're sure this is a brand-new killer, Detective?” Rick Sangre asked.

“There's no question. I can't tell you any details, but I got lab work
to back me up.” I was sure she meant me. I felt a small thrill of pride.

“But this is kind of close, isn't it? Same area, same general
technique—” Eric the Viking started. LaGuerta cut him off.

“Totally different,” she said. “Totally different.”

“So you're completely satisfied that McHale committed all those other
murders and this one is different,” Nick Something said.

“One hundred percent,” LaGuerta said. “Besides, I never said McHale did
the others.”

For a second, the reporters all forgot the horror of not having
pictures. “What?” Nick Something finally said.

LaGuerta blushed, but insisted, “I never said McHale did it. McHale said
he did it, okay? So what am I supposed to do? Tell him go away, I don't
believe you?”

Eric the Viking and Nick Something exchanged a meaningful glance. I
would have, too, if only there had been someone for me to look at. So
instead I peeked at the central head on the altar. It didn't actually
wink at me, but I'm sure it was just as amazed as I was.

“That's nuts,” Eric muttered, but he was overrun by Rick Sangre.

“Are you willing to let us interview McHale?” Sangre demanded. “With a
camera present?”

We were saved from LaGuerta's answer by the arrival of Captain Matthews.
He clattered up the stairs and stopped dead as he saw our little art
exhibit. “Jesus Christ,” he said. Then his gaze swung to the group of
reporters around LaGuerta. “What the hell are you guys doing up here?”
he asked.

LaGuerta looked around the room, but nobody volunteered anything. “I let
them in,” she said finally. “Unofficially. Off the record.”

“You didn't say off the record,” Rick Sangre blurted out. “You just said
unofficially.”

LaGuerta glared at him. “Unofficially /means/ off the record.”

“Get out,” Matthews barked. “Officially and on the record. Out.”

Eric the Viking cleared his throat. “Captain, do you agree with
Detective LaGuerta that this is a brand-new string of murders, a
different killer?”

“Out,” Matthews repeated. “I'll answer questions downstairs.”

“I need footage,” Rick Sangre said. “It will only take a minute.”

Matthews nodded toward the exit. “Sergeant Doakes?”

Doakes materialized and took Rick Sangre's elbow. “Gentlemen,” he said
in his soft and scary voice. The three reporters looked at him. I saw
Nick Something swallow hard. Then they all three turned without a sound
and trooped out.

Matthews watched them go. When they were safely out of earshot he turned
on LaGuerta. “Detective,” he said in a voice so venomous he must have
learned it from Doakes, “if you ever pull this kind of shit again you'll
be lucky to get a job doing parking lot security at Wal-Mart.”

LaGuerta turned pale green and then bright red. “Captain, I just
wanted—” she said. But Matthews had already turned away. He straightened
his tie, combed his hair back with one hand, and chased down the stairs
after the reporters.

I turned to look at the altar again. It hadn't changed, but they were
starting to dust for prints now. Then they would take it apart to
analyze the pieces. Soon it would all be just a beautiful memory.

I trundled off down the stairs to find Deborah.

Outside, Rick Sangre already had a camera rolling. Captain Matthews
stood in the wash of lights with microphones thrusting at his chin,
giving his official statement. “. . . always the policy of this
department to leave the investigating officer autonomy on a case, until
such time as it becomes evident that a series of major errors in
judgment call the officer's competence into question. That time has not
yet arrived, but I am monitoring the situation closely. With so much at
stake for the community—”

I spotted Deborah and moved past them. She stood at the barrier of
yellow tape, dressed in her blue patrol uniform. “Nice suit,” I told her.

“I like it,” she said. “You saw?”

“I saw,” I told her. “I also saw Captain Matthews discussing the case
with Detective LaGuerta.”

Deborah sucked in her breath. “What did they say?”

I patted her arm. “I think I once heard Dad use a very colorful
expression that would cover it. He was ‘reaming her a new asshole.' Do
you know that one?”

She looked startled, then pleased. “That's great. Now I really need your
help, Dex.”

“As opposed to what I've been doing, of course?”

“I don't know what you think you've been doing, but it isn't enough.”

“So unfair, Deb. And so very unkind. After all, you are actually at a
crime site, and wearing your uniform, too. Would you prefer the sex suit?”

She shuddered. “That's not the point. You've been holding back something
about this all along and I want it now.”

For a moment I had nothing to say, always an uncomfortable feeling. I'd
had no idea she was this perceptive. “Why, Deborah—”

“Listen, you think I don't know how this political stuff works, and
maybe I'm not as smart about it as you are, but I know they're all going
to be busy covering their own asses for a while. Which means nobody is
going to be doing any real police work.”

“Which means you see a chance to do some of your own? Bravo, Debs.”

“And it also means I need your help like never before.” She put a hand
out and squeezed mine. “Please, Dexy?”

I don't know what shocked me more—her insight, her hand-squeezing, or
her use of the nickname “Dexy.” I hadn't heard her say that since I was
ten years old. Whether she intended it or not, when she called me Dexy
she put us both firmly back in Harry Land, a place where family mattered
and obligations were as real as headless hookers. What could I say?

“Of course, Deborah,” I said. Dexy indeed. It was almost enough to make
me feel emotion.

“Good,” she said, and she was all business again, a wonderfully quick
change that I had to admire. “What's the one thing that really sticks
out right now?” she asked with a nod toward the second floor.

“The body parts,” I said. “As far as you know, is anybody looking for them?”

Deborah gave me one of her new Worldly Cop looks, the sour one. “As far
as I know, there are more officers assigned to keeping the TV cameras
out than to doing any actual work on this thing.”

“Good,” I said. “If we can find the body parts, we might get a small
jump on things.”

“Okay. Where do we look?”

It was a fair question, which naturally put me at a disadvantage. I had
no idea where to look. Would the limbs be left in the killing room? I
didn't think so—it seemed messy to me, and if he wanted to use that same
room again, it would be impossible with that kind of nasty clutter lying
around.

All right, then I would assume that the rest of the meat had gone
somewhere else. But where?

Or perhaps, it slowly dawned on me, the real question should be: Why?
The display of the heads was for a reason. What would be the reason for
putting the rest of the bodies somewhere else? Simple concealment?
No—nothing was simple with this man, and concealment was evidently not a
virtue he prized too highly. Especially right now, when he was showing
off a bit. That being the case, where would he leave a stack of leftovers?

“Well?” Deborah demanded. “How about it? Where should we look?”

I shook my head. “I don't know,” I said slowly. “Wherever he left the
stuff, it's part of his statement. And we're not really sure what his
statement is yet, are we?”

“Goddamn it, Dexter—”

“I know he wants to rub our noses in it. He needs to say that we did
something incredibly dumb, and even if we hadn't he's still smarter than
we are.”

“So far he's right,” she said, putting on her grouper face.

“So . . . wherever he dumped the stuff, it has to continue that
statement. That we're stupid— No, I'm wrong. That we DID something stupid.”

“Right. Very important difference.”

“Please, Deb, you'll hurt your face like that. It is important, because
he's going to comment on the ACT, and not on the ACTORS.”

“Uh-huh. That's really good, Dex. So we should probably head for the
nearest dinner theater and look around for an actor with blood up to his
elbows, right?”

I shook my head. “No blood, Deb. None at all. That's one of the most
important things.”

“How can you be so sure?”

“Because there's been no blood at any of the scenes. That's deliberate,
and it's vital to what he's doing. And this time, he'll repeat the
important parts, but comment on what he's already done, because we've
missed it, don't you see?”

“Sure, I see. Makes perfect sense. So why don't we go check Office Depot
Center? He's probably got the bodies stacked up in the net again.”

I opened my mouth to make some wonderfully clever reply. The hockey rink
was all wrong, completely and obviously wrong. It had been an
experiment, something different, but I knew he wouldn't repeat it. I
started to explain this to Deb, that the only reason he would ever
repeat the rink would be— I stopped dead, my mouth hanging open. /Of
course/, I thought. /Naturally/.

“Now who's making a fish face, huh? What is it, Dex?”

For a moment I didn't say anything. I was far too busy trying to catch
my whirling thoughts. /The only reason he would repeat the hockey rink
was to show us we had the wrong guy locked up./

“Oh, Deb,” I said at last. “Of course. You're right, the arena. You are
right for all the wrong reasons, but still—”

“Beats the hell out of being wrong,” she said, and headed for her car.

CHAPTER 21

“YOU DO UNDERSTAND IT'S A LONG SHOT?” I SAID. “Probably we won't find
anything at all.”

“I know that,” Deb said.

“And we don't actually have any jurisdiction here. We're in Broward. And
the Broward guys don't like us, so—”

“For Christ's sake, Dexter,” she snapped. “You're chattering like a
schoolgirl.”

Perhaps that was true, although it was very unkind of her to say so. And
Deborah, on the other hand, appeared to be a bundle of steely, tightly
wrapped nerves. As we turned off the Sawgrass Expressway and drove into
the parking lot of the Office Depot Center she bit down harder. I could
almost hear her jaw creak. “Dirty Harriet,” I said to myself, but
apparently Deb was eavesdropping.

“Fuck off,” she said.

I looked from Deborah's granite profile to the arena. For one brief
moment, with the early-morning sunlight hitting it just right, it looked
like the building was surrounded by a fleet of flying saucers. Of course
it was only the outdoor lighting fixtures that sprouted around the arena
like oversized steel toadstools. Someone must have told the architect
they were distinctive. “Youthful and vigorous,” too, most likely. And
I'm sure they were, in the right light. I did hope they would find the
right light sometime soon.

We drove one time around the arena, looking for signs of life. On the
second circuit, a battered Toyota pulled up beside one of the doors. The
passenger door was held closed with a loop of rope that ran out the
window and around the doorpost. Opening the driver's door as she parked,
Deborah was already stepping out of the car while it was still rolling.

“Excuse me, sir?” she said to the man getting out of the Toyota. He was
fifty, a squat guy in ratty green pants and a blue nylon jacket. He
glanced at Deb in her uniform and was instantly nervous.

“Wha'?” he said. “I din't do nothin'.”

“Do you work here, sir?”

“Shoor. 'Course, why you think I'm here, eight o'clock in the morning?”

“What's your name, please sir?”

He fumbled for his wallet. “Steban Rodriguez. I got a ID.”

Deborah waved that off. “That's not necessary,” she said. “What are you
doing here at this hour, sir?”

He shrugged and pushed his wallet back into the pocket. “I s'posed to be
here earlier most days, but the team is on the road—Vancouver, Ottawa,
and L.A. So I get here a little later.”

“Is anyone else here right now, Steban?”

“Naw, jus' me. They all sleep late.”

“What about at night? Is there a guard?”

He waved an arm around. “The security goes around the parking lot at
night, but not too much. I the first one here mos' days.”

“The first one to go inside, you mean?”

“Yeah, tha's right, what I say?”

I climbed out of the car and leaned across the roof. “Are you the guy
who drives the Zamboni for the morning skate?” I asked him. Deb glanced
at me, annoyed. Steban peered at me, taking in my natty Hawaiian shirt
and gabardine slacks. “Wha' kinda cop you are, ha?”

“I'm a nerd cop,” I said. “I just work in the lab.”

“Ooohhh, shoor,” he said, nodding his head as if that made sense.

“Do you run the Zamboni, Steban?” I repeated.

“Yeah, you know. They don' lemme drive her in the games, you know. Tha's
for the guys with suits. They like to put a kid, you know. Some
celebrity maybe. Ride around and wave, that shit. But I get to do it for
the morning skate, you know. When the team is in town. I run the Zamboni
just the morning, real early. But they on the road now so I come later.”

“We'd like to take a look inside the arena,” Deb said, clearly impatient
with me for speaking out of turn. Steban turned back to her, a crafty
gleam lighting up half of one eye.

“Shoor,” he said. “You got a warrant?”

Deborah blushed. It made a wonderful contrast to the blue of her
uniform, but it was possibly not the most effective choice for
reinforcing her authority. And because I knew her well, I knew she would
realize she had blushed and get mad. Since we did not have a warrant and
did not, in fact, have any business here whatsoever that could remotely
be considered officially sanctioned, I did not think that getting mad
was our best tactical maneuver.

“Steban,” I said before Deb could say anything regrettable.

“Hah?”

“How long have you worked here?”

He shrugged. “Since the place open. I work at the old arena two year
before that.”

“So you were working here last week when they found the dead body on the
ice?”

Steban looked away. Under his tan, his face turned green. He swallowed
hard. “I never want to see something like that again, man,” he said.
“Never.”

I nodded with genuine synthetic sympathy. “I really don't blame you,” I
said. “And that's why we're here, Steban.”

He frowned. “Wha' you mean?”

I glanced at Deb to make sure she wasn't drawing a weapon or anything.
She glared at me with tight-lipped disapproval and tapped her foot, but
she didn't say anything.

“Steban,” I said, moving a little closer to the man and making my voice
as confidential and manly as I could, “we think there's a chance that
when you open those doors this morning, you might find the same kind of
thing waiting for you.”

“Shit!” he exploded. “I don' want nothin' to do with that.”

“Of course you don't.”

“/Me cago en diez/ with that shit,” he said.

“Exactly,” I agreed. “So why not let us take a peek first? Just to be sure.”

He gaped at me for a moment, then at Deborah, who was still scowling—a
very striking look for her, nicely set off by her uniform.

“I could get in trouble,” he said. “Lose my job.”

I smiled with authentic-looking sympathy. “Or you could go inside and
find a stack of chopped-up arms and legs all by yourself. A lot more of
them this time.”

“Shit,” he said again. “I get in trouble, lose my job, huh? Why I should
do that, huh?”

“How about civic duty?”

“Come on, man,” he said. “Don't fuck with me. What do you care about if
I lose my job?”

He did not actually hold out his hand, which I thought was very genteel,
but it was clear that he hoped for a small present to insulate him
against the possible loss of his job. Very reasonable, considering that
this was Miami. But all I had was $5, and I really needed to get a
cruller and a cup of coffee. So I just nodded with manly understanding.

“You're right,” I said. “We hoped you wouldn't have to see all the body
parts—did I say there were quite a few this time? But I certainly don't
want you to lose your job. Sorry to bother you, Steban. Have a nice
day!” I smiled at Deborah. “Let's go, Officer. We should get back to the
other scene and search for the fingers.”

Deborah was still scowling, but at least she had the native wit to play
along. She opened her car door as I cheerfully waved to Steban and
climbed in.

“Wait!” Steban called. I glanced at him with an expression of polite
interest. “I swear to God, I don' wanna find that shit ever again,” he
said. He looked at me for a moment, perhaps hoping I would loosen up and
hand him a fistful of Krugerands, but as I said, that cruller was
weighing heavily on my mind and I did not relent. Steban licked his
lips, then turned away quickly and jammed a key into the lock of the
large double door. “Go 'head. I wait out here.”

“If you're sure—” I said.

“Come on, man, what you want from me? Go 'head!”

I stood up and smiled at Deborah. “He's sure,” I said. She just shook
her head at me, a strange combination of little-sister exasperation and
cop sour humor. She walked around the car and led the way in through the
door and I followed.

Inside, the arena was cool and dark, which shouldn't have surprised me.
It was, after all, a hockey rink early in the morning. No doubt Steban
knew where the light switch was, but he had not offered to tell us. Deb
unsnapped the large flashlight from her belt and swung the beam around
the ice. I held my breath as the light picked out one goalie's net, then
the other. She swept back around the perimeter one time, slowly, pausing
once or twice, then back to me.

“Nothing,” she said. “Jack shit.”

“You sound disappointed.”

She snorted at me and headed back out. I stayed in the middle of the
rink, feeling the cool radiate up off the ice, and thinking my happy
thoughts. Or, more precisely, not quite /my/ happy thoughts.

Because as Deb turned to go out I heard a small voice from somewhere
over my shoulder; a cool and dry chuckle, a familiar feather touch just
under the threshold of hearing. And as dear Deborah departed, I stood
motionless there on the ice, closed my eyes and listened to what my
ancient friend had to say. It was not much—just a sub-whisper, a hint of
unvocal, but I listened. I heard him chuckle and mutter soft and
terrible things in one ear, while the other ear let me know that Deborah
had told Steban to come in and turn on the lights. Which moments later
he did, as the small off-voice whisper rose in a sudden crescendo of
rattling jolly humor and good-natured horror.

/What is it?/ I asked politely. My only answer was a surge of hungry
amusement. I had no idea what it meant. But I was not greatly surprised
when the screaming started.

Steban was really terrible at screaming. It was a hoarse, strangled
grunting that sounded more like he was being violently sick than
anything else. The man brought no sense of music to the job.

I opened my eyes. It was impossible to concentrate under these
circumstances, and anyway there was nothing more to hear. The whispering
had stopped when the screaming began. After all, the screams said it
all, didn't they? And so I opened my eyes just in time to see Steban
catapult out of the little closet at the far end of the arena and vault
onto the rink. He went clattering across the ice, slipping and sliding
and moaning hoarsely in Spanish and finally hurling headlong into the
boards. He scrabbled up and skittered toward the door, grunting with
horror. A small splotch of blood smeared the ice where he had fallen.

Deborah came quickly through the door, her gun drawn, and Steban clawed
past her, stumbling out into the light of day. “What is it?” Deborah
said, holding her weapon ready.

I tilted my head, hearing one last echo of the final dry chuckle, and
now, with the grunting horror still ringing in my ears, I understood.

“I believe Steban has found something,” I said.

CHAPTER 22

POLICE POLITICS, AS I HAD TRIED SO HARD TO impress on Deborah, was a
slippery and many-tentacled thing. And when you brought together two law
enforcement organizations that really didn't care for each other, mutual
operations tended to go very slowly, very much by the book, and with a
good deal of foot-dragging, excuse-making, and veiled insults and
threats. All great fun to watch, of course, but it did draw out the
proceedings just a trifle more than necessary. Consequently it was
several hours after Steban's dreadful yodeling exhibition before the
jurisdictional squabbling was straightened out and our team actually
began to examine the happy little surprise our new friend Steban had
discovered when he opened the closet door.

During that time Deborah stood off to one side for the most part,
working very hard at controlling her impatience but not terribly hard at
hiding it. Captain Matthews arrived with Detective LaGuerta in tow. They
shook hands with their Broward County counterparts, Captain Moon and
Detective McClellan. There was a lot of barely polite sparring, which
boiled down to this: Matthews was reasonably certain that the discovery
of six arms and six legs in Broward was part of his department's
investigation of three heads lacking the same pieces in Miami-Dade. He
stated, in terms that were far too friendly and simple, that it seemed a
bit farfetched to think that he would find three heads without bodies,
and then three totally different bodies without heads would turn up here.

Moon and McClellan, with equal logic, pointed out that people found
heads in Miami all the time, but in Broward it was a little more
unusual, and so maybe they took it a bit more seriously, and anyway
there was no way to know for sure they were connected until some
preliminary work had been done, which clearly ought to be done by them,
since it was in their jurisdiction. Of course they would cheerfully pass
on the results.

And of course that was unacceptable to Matthews. He explained carefully
that the Broward people didn't know what to look for and might miss
something or destroy a piece of key evidence. Not, of course, through
incompetence or stupidity; Matthews was quite sure the Broward people
were perfectly competent, considering.

This was naturally not taken in a cheerful spirit of cooperation by
Moon, who observed with a little bit of feeling that this seemed to
imply that his department was full of second-rate morons. By this point
Captain Matthews was mad enough to reply much too politely, oh, no, not
second-rate at all. I'm sure it would have ended in a fistfight if the
gentleman from the Florida Department of Law Enforcement had not arrived
to referee.

The FDLE is a sort of state-level FBI. They have jurisdiction anywhere
in the state at any time, and unlike the feds they are respected by most
of the local cops. The officer in question was a man of average height
and build with a shaved head and a close-cropped beard. He didn't really
seem out of the ordinary to me, but when he stepped between the two much
larger police captains they instantly shut up and took a step back. In
short order he had things settled down and organized and we got quickly
back to being the neat and well-ordered scene of a multiple homicide.

The man from FDLE had ruled that it was Miami-Dade's investigation
unless and until tissue samples proved the body parts here and the heads
down there were unrelated. In practical and immediate terms, this meant
that Captain Matthews got to have his picture taken first by the mob of
reporters already clustering outside.

Angel-no-relation arrived and went to work. I was not at all sure what
to make of it, and I don't mean the jurisdictional squabbling. No, I was
far more concerned with the event itself, which had left me with a great
deal to think about—not merely the fact of the killings and the
redistribution of the meat, which was piquant enough. But I had of
course managed to sneak a peak into Steban's little closet of horrors
earlier, before the troops arrived—can you blame me, really? I had only
wanted to sample the carnage and try to understand why my dear unknown
business associate had chosen to stack the leftovers there; truly, just
a quick look-see.

So immediately after Steban had skidded out the door squealing and
grunting like a pig choking on a grapefruit, I had skipped eagerly back
to the closet to see what had set him off.

The parts were not wrapped carefully this time. Instead, they were laid
out on the floor in four groups. And as I looked closer I realized a
wonderful thing.

One leg had been laid straight along the left-hand side of the closet.
It was a pale, bloodless blue-white, and around the ankle there was even
a small gold chain with a heart-shaped trinket. Very cute, really,
unspoiled by awful bloodstains; truly elegant work. Two dark arms,
equally well cut, had been bent at the elbow and placed alongside the
leg, with the elbow pointing away. Right next to this the remaining
limbs, all bent at the joint, had been arranged in two large circles.

It took me a moment. I blinked, and suddenly it swam into focus and I
had to frown very hard to keep myself from giggling out loud like the
schoolgirl Deb had accused me of being.

Because he had arranged the arms and legs in letters, and the letters
spelled out a single small word: BOO.

The three torsos were carefully arranged below the BOO in a
quarter-circle, making a cute little Halloween smile.

What a scamp.

But even as I admired the playful spirit this prank exposed, I wondered
why he had chosen to put the display here, in a closet, instead of out
on the ice where it could gain the recognition of a wider audience. It
was a very spacious closet, granted, but still close quarters, just
enough room for the display. So why?

And as I wondered, the outer door of the arena swung open with a
clatter—the first of the arriving rescue team, no doubt. And the door
crashing wide sent, a moment later, a draft of cool air over the ice and
onto my back—

/The cold air went over my spine and was answered by a flow of warmth
moving upward along the same pathway. It ran light-fingered up into the
unlit bottom of my consciousness and something changed somewhere deep in
the moonless night of my lizard brain and I felt the Dark Passenger
agree violently with something that I did not even hear or understand
except that it had to do somehow with the primal urgency of cool air and
the walls closing in and an attacking sense of—/

Rightness. No question about it. Something here was just plain right and
made my obscure hitchhiker pleased and excited and satisfied in a way I
did not begin to understand. And floating in above all that was the
strange notion that this was very familiar. None of it made any sense to
me, but there it was. And before I could explore these strange
revelations any further I was being urged by a squat young man in a blue
uniform to step away and keep my hands in plain sight. No doubt he was
the first of the arriving troops, and he was holding his weapon on me in
a very convincing way. Since he had only one dark eyebrow running all
the way across his face and no apparent forehead, I decided it would be
a very good idea to go along with his wishes. He looked to be just the
sort of dull-witted brute who might shoot an innocent person—or even me.
I stepped away from the closet.

Unfortunately, my retreat revealed the little diorama in the closet, and
the young man was suddenly very busy finding someplace to put his
breakfast. He made it to a large trash can about ten feet away before
commencing his ugly blargging sounds. I stood quite still and waited for
him to finish. Nasty habit, hurling half-digested food around like that.
So unsanitary. And this was a guardian of public safety, too.

More uniforms trotted in, and soon my simian friend had several buddies
sharing the trash can with him. The noise was extremely unpleasant, to
say nothing of the smell now wafting my way. But I waited politely for
them to finish, since one of the fascinating things about a handgun is
that it can be fired almost as well by someone who is throwing up. But
one of the uniforms eventually straightened up, wiped his face on his
sleeve, and began to question me. I was soon sorted out and pushed over
to one side with instructions not to go anywhere or touch anything.

Captain Matthews and Detective LaGuerta had arrived soon after, and when
they finally took over the scene I relaxed a bit. But now that I could
actually go somewhere and touch something, I simply sat and thought. And
the things I thought about were surprisingly troublesome.

/Why had the display in the closet seemed familiar?/

Unless I was going to return to my idiocy of earlier in the day and
persuade myself that I had done this, I was at a loss as to why it
should seem so delightfully unsurprising. Of course I hadn't done it. I
was already ashamed of the stupidity of that notion. Boo, indeed. It was
not even worth taking the time to scoff at the idea. Ridiculous.

So, um—why did it seem familiar?

I sighed and experienced one more new feeling, befuddlement. I simply
had no notion of what was going on, except that somehow I was a part of
it. This did not seem a terribly helpful revelation, since it matched
exactly all my other closely reasoned analytical conclusions so far. If
I ruled out the absurd idea that I had done this without knowing it—and
I did—then each subsequent explanation became even more unlikely. And so
Dexter's summary of the case reads as follows: he is involved somehow,
but doesn't even know what that means. I could feel the little wheels in
my once-proud brain leaping off their tracks and clattering to the
floor. Clang-clang. Whee. Dexter derailed.

Luckily, I was saved from complete collapse by the appearance of dear
Deborah. “Come on,” she said brusquely, “we're going upstairs.”

“May I ask why?”

“We're going to talk to the office staff,” she said. “See if they know
anything.”

“They must know something if they have an office,” I offered.

She looked at me for a moment, then turned away. “Come on,” she said.

It may have been the commanding tone in her voice, but I went. We walked
to the far side of the arena from where I had been sitting and into the
lobby. A Broward cop stood beside the elevator there, and just outside
the long row of glass doors I could see several more of them standing at
a barrier. Deb marched up to the cop at the elevator and said, “I'm
Morgan.” He nodded and pushed the up button. He looked at me with a lack
of expression that said a great deal. “I'm Morgan, too,” I told him. He
just looked at me, then turned his head away to stare out the glass doors.

There was a muted chime and the elevator arrived. Deborah stalked in and
slammed her hand against the button hard enough to make the cop look up
at her and the door slid shut.

“Why so glum, sis?” I asked her. “Isn't this what you wanted to do?”

“It's make-work, and everybody knows it,” she snarled.

“But it's detective-type make-work,” I pointed out.

“That bitch LaGuerta stuck her oar in,” she hissed. “As soon as I'm done
spinning my wheels here, I have to go back out on hooker duty.”

“Oh, dear. In your little sex suit?”

“In my little sex suit,” she said, and before I could really formulate
any magical words of consolation we arrived at the office level and the
elevator doors slid open. Deb stalked out and I followed. We soon found
the staff lounge, where the office workers had been herded to wait until
the full majesty of the law had the time to get around to them. Another
Broward cop stood at the door of the lounge, presumably to make certain
that none of the staff made a break for the Canadian border. Deborah
nodded to the cop at the door and went into the lounge. I trailed behind
her without much enthusiasm and let my mind wander over my problem. A
moment later I was startled out of my reverie when Deborah jerked her
head at me and led a surly, greasy-faced young man with long and awful
hair toward the door. I followed again.

She was naturally separating him from the others for questioning, very
good police procedure, but to be perfectly honest it did not light a
fire in my heart. I knew without knowing why that none of these people
had anything meaningful to contribute. Judging from this first specimen,
it was probably safe to apply that generalization to his life as well as
to this murder. This was just dull routine make-work that had been doled
out to Deb because the captain thought she had done something good, but
she was still a pest. So he had sent her away with a piece of real
detective drudgery to keep her busy and out of sight. And I had been
dragged with her because Deb wanted me along. Possibly she wanted to see
if my fantastic ESP powers could help determine what these office sheep
had eaten for breakfast. One look at this young gentleman's complexion
and I was fairly sure he had eaten cold pizza, potato chips, and a liter
of Pepsi. It had ruined his complexion and given him an air of vacuous
hostility.

Still, I followed along as Mr. Grumpy directed Deborah to a conference
room at the back of the building. There was a long oak table with ten
black high-backed chairs in the center of the room, and a desk in the
corner with a computer and some audio-visual equipment. As Deb and her
pimply young friend sat and began trading frowns, I wandered over to the
desk. A small bookshelf sat under the window beside the desk. I looked
out the window. Almost directly below me I could see the growing crowd
of reporters and squad cars that now surrounded the door where we had
gone in with Steban.

I looked at the bookshelf, thinking I would clear a small space and lean
there, tastefully away from the conversation. There was a stack of
manila folders and perched on top of it was a small gray object. It was
squarish and looked to be plastic. A black wire ran from the thing over
to the back of the computer. I picked it up to move it.

“Hey!” the surly geek said. “Don't mess with the webcam!”

I looked at Deb. She looked at me and I swear I saw her nostrils flair
like a racehorse at the starting gate. “The what?” she said quietly.

“I had it focused down on the entrance,” he said. “Now I gotta refocus
it. Man, why do you have to mess with my stuff?”

“He said webcam,” I said to Deborah.

“A camera,” she said to me.

“Yes.”

She turned to young Prince Charming. “Is it on?”

He gaped at her, still concentrating on maintaining his righteous frown.
“What?”

“The camera,” Deborah said. “Does it work?”

He snorted, and then wiped his nose with a finger. “What do you think, I
would get all worked up if it didn't? Two hundred bucks. It totally works.”

I looked out the window where the camera had been pointing as he droned
on in his surly grumble. “I got a Web site and everything. Kathouse.com.
People can watch the team when they get here and when they leave.”

Deborah drifted over and stood beside me, looking out the window. “It
was pointed at the door,” I said.

“Duh,” our happy pal said. “How else are people on my Web site gonna see
the team?”

Deborah turned and looked at him. After about five seconds he blushed
and dropped his eyes to the table. “Was the camera turned on last
night?” she said.

He didn't look up, just mumbled, “Sure. I mean, I guess so.”

Deborah turned to me. Her computer knowledge was confined to knowing
enough to fill out standardized traffic reports. She knew I was a little
more savvy.

“How do you have it set up?” I asked the top of the young man's head.
“Do the images automatically archive?”

This time he looked up. I had used archive as a verb, so I must be okay.
“Yeah,” he said. “It refreshes every fifteen seconds and just dumps to
the hard drive. I usually erase in the morning.”

Deborah actually clutched my arm hard enough to break the skin. “Did you
erase this morning?” she asked him.

He glanced away again. “No,” he said. “You guys came stomping in and
yelling and stuff. I didn't even get to check my e-mail.”

Deborah looked at me. “Bingo,” I said.

“Come here,” she said to our unhappy camper.

“Huh?” he said.

“Come here,” she repeated, and he stood up slowly, mouth hanging open,
and rubbed his knuckles.

“What,” he said.

“Could you please come over here, sir?” Deborah ordered with truly
veteran-cop technique, and he stuttered into motion and came over. “Can
we see the pictures from last night, please?”

He gaped at the computer, then at her. “Why?” he said. Ah, the mysteries
of human intelligence.

“Because,” Deborah said, very slowly and carefully. “I think you might
have taken a picture of the killer.”

He stared at her and blinked, then blushed. “No way,” he said.

“Way,” I told him.

He stared at me, and then at Deb, his jaw hanging open. “Awesome,” he
breathed. “No shit? I mean— No, really? I mean—” He blushed even harder.

“Can we look at the pictures?” Deb said. He stood still for a second,
then plunged into the chair at the desk and touched the mouse.
Immediately the screen came to life, and he began typing and
mouse-clicking furiously. “What time should I start?”

“What time did everybody leave?” Deborah asked him.

He shrugged. “We were empty last night. Everybody gone by, what—eight
o'clock?”

“Start at midnight,” I said, and he nodded.

“'Kay,” he said. He worked quietly for a moment, then, “Come on,” he
mumbled. “It's only like a six hundred megaherz,” he said. “They won't
update. They keep saying it's fine, but sooooo freaking slow, and it
won't— Okay,” he said, breaking off suddenly.

A dark image appeared on the monitor: the empty parking lot below us.
“Midnight,” he said, and stared at the screen. After fifteen seconds,
the picture changed to the same picture.

“Do we have to watch five hours of this?” Deborah asked.

“Scroll through,” I said. “Look for headlights or something moving.”

“Riiiiiight,” he said. He did some rapid point-and-click, and the
pictures began to flip past at one per second. They didn't change much
at first; the same dark parking lot, one bright light out at the edge of
the picture. After about fifty frames had clicked past, an image jumped
into view. “A truck!” Deborah said.

Our pet nerd shook his head. “Security,” he said, and in the next frame
the security car was visible.

He kept scrolling, and the pictures rolled by, eternal and unchanging.
Every thirty or forty frames we would see the security truck pass, and
then nothing. After several minutes of this, the pattern stopped, and
there was a long stretch of nothing. “Busted,” my greasy new friend said.

Deborah gave him a hard look. “The camera is broken?”

He looked up at her, blushed again, and looked away. “The security
dudes,” he explained. “They totally suck. Every night at, like, three?
They park over at the other side and go to sleep.” He nodded at the
unchanging pictures scrolling past. “See? Hello! Mr. Security Dude? Hard
at work?” He made a wet sound deep in his nose that I had to assume was
meant to be laughter. “Not very!” He repeated the snorting sound and
started the pictures scrolling again.

And then suddenly— “Wait!” I called out.

On-screen, a van popped into view at the door below us. There was
another pop as the image changed, and a man stood beside the truck. “Can
you make it go closer?” Deborah asked.

“Zoom in,” I said before he could do more than frown a little. He moved
the cursor, highlighted the dark figure on the screen, and clicked the
mouse. The picture jumped to a closer look.

“You're not gonna get much more resolution,” he said. “The pixels—”

“Shut up,” said Deborah. She was staring at the screen hard enough to
melt it, and as I stared too I could see why.

It was dark, and the man was still too far away to be certain, but from
the few details I could make out, there was something oddly familiar
about him; the way he stood frozen in the image on the computer, his
weight balanced on both feet, and the overall impression of the profile.
Somehow, as vague as it was, it added up to something. And as a very
loud wave of sibilant chuckling erupted from deep in the backseat of my
brain, it fell on me with the impact of a concert grand piano that,
actually, he looked an awful lot like—

“Dexter . . . ?” Deborah said, in a sort of hushed and strangled croak.

Yes indeed.

Just like Dexter.

CHAPTER 23

I AM PRETTY SURE THAT DEBORAH TOOK YOUNG MR. Bad Hair Day back to the
lounge, because when I looked up again, she was standing in front of me,
alone. In spite of her blue uniform she did not look at all like a cop
right now. She looked worried, like she couldn't decide whether to yell
or to cry, like a mommy whose special little boy had let her down in a
big way.

“Well?” she demanded, and I had to agree that she had a point.

“Not terribly,” I said. “You?”

She kicked a chair. It fell over. “Goddamn it, Dexter, don't give me
that clever shit! Tell me something. Tell me that wasn't you!” I didn't
say anything. “Well then, tell me it /is/ you! Just tell me SOMETHING!
Anything at all!”

I shook my head. “I—” There was really nothing to say, so I just shook
my head again. “I'm pretty sure it isn't me,” I said. “I mean, I don't
think so.” Even to me that sounded like I had both feet firmly planted
in the land of lame answers.

“What does that mean, ‘pretty sure'?” Deb demanded. “Does that mean
you're not sure? That it might be you in that picture?”

“Well,” I said, a truly brilliant riposte, considering. “Maybe. I don't
know.”

“And does ‘I don't know' mean you don't know whether you're going to
tell me, or does it mean that you really don't know if that's you in the
picture?”

“I'm pretty sure it isn't me, Deborah,” I repeated. “But I really don't
know for sure. It looks like me, doesn't it?”

“Shit,” she said, and kicked the chair where it lay. It slammed into the
table. “How can you not know, goddamn it?!”

“It /is/ a little tough to explain.”

“Try!”

I opened my mouth, but for once in my life nothing came out. As if
everything else wasn't bad enough, I seemed to be all out of clever,
too. “I just—I've been having these . . . dreams, but—Deb, I really
don't know,” I said, and I may have actually mumbled it.

“Shit shit SHIT!” said Deborah. Kick kick kick.

And it was very hard to disagree with her analysis of the situation.

All my stupid, self-mutilating musings swam back at me with a bright and
mocking edge. /Of course it wasn't me—how could it be me? Wouldn't I
know it if it was me?/ Apparently not, dear boy. Apparently you didn't
actually know anything at all. Because our deep dark dim little brains
tell us all kinds of things that swim in and out of reality, but
pictures do not lie.

Deb unleashed a new volley of savage attacks on the chair, and then
straightened up. Her face was flushed very red and her eyes looked more
like Harry's eyes than they ever had before. “All right,” she said.
“It's like this,” and she blinked and paused for a moment as it occurred
to both of us that she had just said a Harry thing.

And for a second Harry was there in the room between me and Deborah, the
two of us so very different, and yet still both Harry's kids, the two
strange fists of his unique legacy. Some of the steel went out of Deb's
back and she looked human, a thing I hadn't seen for a while. She stared
at me for a long moment, and then turned away. “You're my brother, Dex,”
she said. I was very sure that was not what she had originally intended
to say.

“No one will blame you,” I told her.

“Goddamn you, you're my /brother/!” she snarled, and the ferocity of it
took me completely by surprise. “I don't know what went on with you and
Dad. The stuff you two never talked about. But I know what he would have
done.”

“Turned me in,” I said, and Deborah nodded. Something glittered in the
corner of her eye. “You're all the family I have, Dex.”

“Not such a great bargain for you, is it?”

She turned to me, and I could see tears in both eyes now. For a long
moment she just looked at me. I watched the tear run from her left eye
and roll down her cheek. She wiped it, straightened up, and took a deep
breath, turning away to the window once again.

“That's right,” she said. “He would've turned you in. Which is what I am
going to do.” She looked away from me, out the window, far out to the
horizon.

“I have to finish these interviews,” she said. “I'm leaving you in
charge of determining if this evidence is relevant. Take it to your
computer at home and figure out whatever you have to figure out. And
when I am done here, before I go back out on duty, I am coming to get
it, to hear what you have to say.” She glanced at her watch. “Eight
o'clock. And if I have to take you in then, I will.” She looked back at
me for a very long moment. “Goddamn it, Dexter,” she said softly, and
she left the room.

I moved over to the window and had a look for myself. Below me the
circus of cops and reporters and gawking geeks was swirling, unchanged.
Far away, beyond the parking lot, I could see the expressway, filled
with cars and trucks blasting along at the Miami speed limit of
ninety-five miles per hour. And beyond that in the dim distance was the
high-rise skyline of Miami.

And here in the foreground stood dim dazed Dexter, staring out the
window at a city that did not speak and would not have told him anything
even if it did.

/Goddamn it, Dexter./

I don't know how long I stared out the window, but it eventually
occurred to me that there were no answers out there. There might be
some, though, on Captain Pimple's computer. I turned to the desk. The
machine had a CD-RW drive. In the top drawer I found a box of recordable
CDs. I put one into the drive, copied the entire file of pictures, and
took the CD out. I held it, glanced at it; it didn't have much to say,
and I probably imagined the faint chuckling I thought I heard from the
dark voice in the backseat. But just to be safe, I wiped the file from
the hard drive.

On my way out, the Broward cops on duty didn't stop me, or even speak,
but it did seem to me that they looked at me with a very hard and
suspicious indifference.

I wondered if this was what it felt like to have a conscience. I
supposed I would never really know—unlike poor Deborah, being torn apart
by far too many loyalties that could not possibly live together in the
same brain. I admired her solution, leaving me in charge of determining
if the evidence was relevant. Very neat. It had a very Harry feel to it,
like leaving a loaded gun on the table in front of a guilty friend and
walking away, knowing that guilt would pull the trigger and save the
city the cost of a trial. In Harry's world, a man's conscience couldn't
live with that kind of shame.

But as Harry had known very well, his world was long dead—and I did not
have any conscience, shame, or guilt. All I had was a CD with a few
pictures on it. And of course, those pictures made even less sense than
a conscience.

There had to be some explanation that did not involve Dexter driving a
truck around Miami in his sleep. Of course, most of the drivers on the
road seemed to manage it, but they were at least partially awake when
they started out, weren't they? And here I was, all bright-eyed and
cheerfully alert and not at all the kind of guy who would ever prowl the
city and kill unconsciously; no, I was the kind of guy who wanted to be
awake for every moment of it. And to get right down to the bottom line,
there was the night on the causeway. It was physically impossible that I
could have thrown the head at my own car, wasn't it?

Unless I had made myself believe that I could be in two places at once,
which made a great deal of sense—considering that the only alternative I
could come up with was believing that I only /thought/ I had been
sitting there in my car watching someone else throw the head, when in
fact I had actually thrown the head at my own car and then—

No. Ridiculous. I could not ask the last few shreds of my brain to
believe in this kind of fairy tale. There would be some very simple,
logical explanation, and I would find it, and even though I sounded like
a man trying to convince himself that there was nothing under the bed, I
said it out loud.

“There is a simple, logical explanation,” I said to myself. And because
you never know who else is listening, I added, “And there is nothing
under the bed.”

But once again, the only reply was a very meaningful silence from the
Dark Passenger.

In spite of the usual cheerful bloodlust of the other drivers, I found
no answers on the drive home. Or to be perfectly truthful, I found no
answers that made sense. There were plenty of stupid answers. But they
all revolved around the same central premise, which was that all was not
well inside the skull of our favorite monster, and I found this very
hard to accept. Perhaps it was only that I did not feel any crazier than
I had ever felt. I did not notice any missing gray tissue, I did not
seem to be thinking any slower or more strangely, and so far I'd had no
conversations with invisible buddies that I was aware of.

Except in my sleep, of course—and did that really count? Weren't we all
crazy in our sleep? What was sleep, after all, but the process by which
we dumped our insanity into a dark subconscious pit and came out on the
other side ready to eat cereal instead of the neighbor's children?

And aside from the dreams I'd had, everything made sense: someone else
had thrown the head at me on the causeway, left a Barbie in my
apartment, and arranged the bodies in intriguing ways. Someone else, not
me. Someone other than dear dark Dexter. And that someone else was
finally captured, right here, in the pictures on this CD. And I would
look at the pictures and prove once and for all that—

That it looked very much like the killer might be me?

Good, Dexter. Very good. I told you there was a logical explanation.
Someone else who was actually me. Of course. That made wonderful sense,
didn't it?

I got home and peeked into my apartment carefully. There did not appear
to be anyone waiting for me. There was no reason why there should have
been, of course. But knowing that this archfiend who was terrorizing the
metropolis knew where I lived was a little unsettling. He had proven he
was the kind of monster who might do anything—he could even come in and
leave more doll parts at any time. Especially if he was me.

Which of course he was not. Certainly not. The pictures would show some
small something to prove that the resemblance was only coincidental—and
the fact that I was so strangely attuned to the murders was also
coincidental, no doubt. Yes, this was clearly a series of perfectly
logical monstrous coincidences. Perhaps I should call the Guinness Book
people. I wondered what the world record was for not being sure whether
you committed a string of murders?

I put on a Philip Glass CD and sat in my chair. The music stirred the
emptiness inside me and after a few minutes something like my usual calm
and icy logic returned. I went to my computer and turned it on. I put
the CD into the drive and looked at the pictures. I zoomed in and out
and did everything I knew how to do in an attempt to clean up the
images. I tried things I had only heard about and things that I made up
on the spot, and nothing worked. At the end I was no further along than
I had been when I started. It was just not possible to get enough
resolution to make the face of the man in the picture come clear. Still
I stared at the pictures. I moved them around to different angles. I
printed them out and held them up to the light. I did everything a
normal person would do, and while I was pleased with my imitation, I did
not discover anything except that the man in the picture looked like me.

I just could not get a clear impression of anything, even his clothing.
He wore a shirt that could have been white, or tan, or yellow, or even
light blue. The parking lot light that shone on him was one of the
bright Argon anticrime lights and it cast a pinkish-orange glow; between
that and the lack of resolution in the picture it was impossible to tell
any more. His pants were long, loosely cut, light-colored. Altogether a
standard outfit that anyone might have worn—including me. I had clothing
just like it several times over, enough to outfit an entire platoon of
Dexter lookalikes.

I did manage to zoom in on the side of the truck enough to make out the
letter “A” and, below it, a “B,” followed by an “R” and either a “C” or
an “O.” But the truck was angled away from the camera and that was all I
could see.

None of the other pictures offered me any hints. I watched the sequence
again: the man vanished, reappeared, and then the van was gone. No good
angles, no fortuitous accidental glimpses of his license plate—and no
reason to say with any authority that either it was or was not deftly
dreaming Dexter.

When I finally looked up from the computer night had come and it was
dark outside. And I did what a normal person almost certainly would have
done several hours ago: I quit. There was nothing else I could do except
wait for Deborah. I would have to let my poor tormented sister haul me
away to jail. After all, one way or another I was guilty. I really
should be locked up. Perhaps I could even share a cell with McHale. He
could teach me the rat dance.

And with that thought I did a truly wonderful thing.

I fell asleep.

CHAPTER 24

I HAD NO DREAMS, NO SENSE OF TRAVELING OUTSIDE my body; I saw no
parade of ghostly images or headless, bloodless bodies. No visions of
sugarplums danced in my head. There was nothing there, not even me,
nothing but a dark and timeless sleep. And yet when the telephone woke
me up I knew that the call was about Deborah, and I knew that she was
not coming. My hand was already sweating as I grabbed up the receiver.
“Yes,” I said.

“This is Captain Matthews,” the voice said. “I need to speak to
Detective Morgan, please.”

“She isn't here,” I said, a small part of me sinking from the thought
and what it meant.

“Hmmp. Aahh, well, that's not— When did she leave?”

I glanced at the clock instinctively; it was a quarter after nine and I
fell deeper into the sweats. “She was never here,” I told the captain.

“But she's signed out to your place. She's on duty—she's supposed to be
there.”

“She never got here.”

“Well goddamn it,” he said. “She said you have some evidence we need.”

“I do,” I said. And I hung up the telephone.

I did have some evidence, I was terribly sure of that. I just didn't
quite know what it was. But I had to figure it out, and I did not think
I had a great deal of time. Or to be more accurate, I did not think Deb
had a great deal of time.

And again, I was not aware of how I knew this. I did not consciously say
to myself, “He has Deborah.” No alarming pictures of her impending fate
popped into my brain. And I did not have to experience any blinding
insights or think, “Gee, Deb should have been here by now; this is
unlike her.” I simply knew, as I had known when I woke up, that Deb had
come for me, and she had not made it. And I knew what that meant.

He had her.

He had taken her entirely for my benefit, this I knew. He had been
circling closer and closer to me—coming into my apartment, writing small
messages with his victims, teasing me with hints and glimpses of what he
was doing. And now he was as close as he could get without being in the
same room. He had taken Deb and he was waiting with her. Waiting for me.

But where? And how long would he wait before he became impatient and
started to play without me?

And without me, I knew very well who his playmate would be—Deborah. She
had turned up at my place dressed for work in her hooker outfit,
absolutely gift-wrapped for him. He must have thought it was Christmas.
He had her and she would be his special friend tonight. I did not want
to think of her like that, taped and stretched tight and watching slow
awful pieces of herself disappear forever. But that was how it would be.
Under other circumstances, it might make a wonderful evening's
entertainment—but not with Deborah. I was pretty sure I didn't want
that, didn't want him to do anything permanent and wonderful, not
tonight. Later, perhaps, with someone else. When we knew each other a
little better. But not now. Not with Deborah.

And with that thought of course everything seemed better. It was just so
nice to have that settled. I preferred my sister alive, rather than in
small bloodless sections. Lovely, almost human of me. Now that was
settled: What next? I could call Rita, perhaps take in a movie, or a
walk in the park. Or, let's see—maybe, I don't know . . . save Deborah?
Yes, that sounded like fun. But—

How?

I had a few clues, of course. I knew the way he thought—after all, I had
been thinking that way myself. And he wanted me to find him. He had been
sending that message loud and clear. If I could put all the distracting
stupidity out of my head—all the dreams and New Age fairy-chasing and
everything else—then I was certain that I could arrive at the logical
and correct location. He would not have taken Deb unless he thought he
had given me everything a clever monster would need to know in order to
find him.

All right then, clever Dexter—find him. Track down the Deb-napper. Let
your relentless logic slash across the back trail like an icy wolf pack.
Kick the giant brain into high gear; let the wind race across the
rocketing synapses of your powerful mind as it speeds to its beautiful,
inevitable conclusion. Go, Dexter, go!

Dexter?

Hello? Is anybody in there?

Apparently not. I heard no wind from rocketing synapses. I was as empty
as if I had never been. There was no swirl of debilitating emotions, of
course, since I didn't have any emotions to swirl. But the result was
just as daunting. I was as numb and drained as if I really could feel
something. Deborah was gone. She was in terrible danger of becoming a
fascinating work of performance art. And her only hope of maintaining
any kind of existence beyond a series of still pictures tacked up on a
police lab board was her battered, brain-dead brother. Poor dog-dumb
Dexter, sitting in a chair with his brain running in circles, chasing
its tail, howling at the moon.

I took a deep breath. Of all the times I had ever needed to be me, this
was one of the foremost. I concentrated very hard and steadied me, and
as a small amount of Dexter returned to fill the echo in my brain
cavity, I realized just how human and stupid I had become. There was
really no great mystery here. In fact, it was patently obvious. My
friend had done everything but send a formal invitation reading, “The
honor of your presence is requested at the vivisection of your sister.
Black heart optional.” But even this small blob of logic was wiped out
of my throbbing skull by a new thought that wormed its way in, oozing
rotten logic.

/I had been asleep when Deb disappeared./

Could that mean that once again I had done it without knowing it? What
if I had already taken Deb apart somewhere, stacked the pieces in some
small, cold storage room and—

Storage room? Where had that come from?

/The closed-in feeling . . . the rightness of the closet at the hockey
rink . . . the cool air blowing across my spine/ . . . Why did that
matter? Why did I keep coming back to that? Because no matter what else
happened, I did; I returned to those same illogical sense memories, and
there was no reason for them that I could see. What did it mean? And why
did I actually give a single hummingbird's fart what it meant? Because
whether it meant something or not, it was all I had to go on. I had to
find a place that matched that sense of cool and pressing rightness.
There was simply no other way to go: find the box. And there I would
find Deb, too, and find either myself or my not-self. Wasn't that simple?

No. It wasn't simple at all, just simpleminded. It made absolutely no
sense to pay any attention to the ghostly secret messages floating up at
me from my dreams. Dreams had no existence in reality, left no Freddy
Krueger–crossover claw marks on our wake-up world. I couldn't very well
dash out of the house and drive aimlessly around in a psychic funk. I
was a cool and logical being. And so it was in a cool and logical manner
that I locked my apartment door and strolled to the car. I still had no
idea where I was going, but the need to get there quickly had grabbed
the reins and whipped me down to the building's parking area, where I
kept my car. But twenty feet away from my trusty vehicle I slammed to a
stop as though I had run into an invisible wall.

The dome light was on.

I had certainly not left it on—it had been daylight when I parked, and I
could see that the doors were closed tightly. A casual thief would have
left the door ajar to avoid the noise from closing it.

I approached slowly, not at all sure what I expected to see or whether I
really wanted to see it. From five feet away I could see something in
the passenger seat. I circled the car carefully and peered down at it,
my nerves tingling, and peeked in. And there it was.

Barbie again. I was getting quite a collection.

This one was dressed in a little sailor hat and a shirt with a bare
midriff, and tight pink hot pants. In one hand she clutched a small
suitcase that said CUNARD on the side.

I opened the door and picked up the doll. I pulled the little suitcase
from Barbie's hand and popped it open. Some small something fell out and
rolled onto the floorboard. I picked it up. It looked an awful lot like
Deborah's class ring. On the inside of the band was etched D.M.,
Deborah's initials.

I collapsed onto the seat, clutching Barbie in my sweaty hands. I turned
her over. I bent her legs. I waved her arms. And what did you do last
night, Dexter? Oh, I played with my dolls while a friend chopped up my
sister.

I did not waste any time wondering how Cruise Line Hooker Barbie had
gotten into my car. This was clearly a message—or a clue? But clues
really ought to hint at something, and this one seemed to lead in the
wrong direction. Clearly he had Debbie—but Cunard? How did that fit in
with tight cold killing space? I could see no connection. But there was
really only one place in Miami where it did fit.

I drove up Douglas and turned right through Coconut Grove. I had to slow
down to thread my way through the parade of happy imbeciles dancing
between the shops and cafés. They all seemed to have far too much time
and money and very few clues beyond that, and it took me much longer
than it should have to get through them, but it was hard to be too upset
since I didn't actually know where I was going. Onward to somewhere;
along Bayfront Drive, over to Brickle, and into downtown. I saw no huge
neon signs bedecked with flashing arrows and encouraging words to direct
me: “This way to the dissection!” But I drove on, approaching American
Airlines Arena and, just beyond, MacArthur Causeway. In the quick
glimpse I got on the near side of the arena, I could see the
superstructure of a cruise ship in Government Cut, not a Cunard Lines
ship, or course, but I peered anxiously for some sign. It seemed obvious
that I was not actually being directed onto a cruise ship; too crowded,
too many snooping officials. But somewhere nearby, somewhere
related—which of course had to mean what? No further clues. I looked
hard enough at the cruise ship to melt the poop deck, but Deborah did
not spring from the hold and dance down the gangway.

I looked some more. Beside the ship, cargo cranes reared up into the
night sky like abandoned props from /Star Wars/. A little farther and
the stacks of cargo boxes were just barely visible in the dark below the
cranes, great untidy heaps of them, scattered across the ground as if a
gigantic and very bored child had flung out his toy box full of building
blocks. Some of the storage boxes were refrigerated. And then beyond
these boxes—

Back up just for a moment, dear boy.

Who was that whispering to me, muttering what soft words to all-alone
darkly driving Dexter? Who sat behind me now; whose dry chuckling filled
the backseat? And why? What message was rattling into my brainless,
echo-empty head?

/Storage boxes./

/Some of them refrigerated./

But why the storage boxes? What possible reason could I have to be
interested in a pile of cold, tightly enclosed spaces?

Oh, yes. Well. Since you put it that way.

Could this be the place, the future home of the Dexter's Birthplace
Museum? With authentic, lifelike exhibits, including a rare live
performance by Dexter's only sister?

I yanked my steering wheel hard, cutting off a BMW with a very loud
horn. I extended my middle finger, for once driving like the Miami
native I was, and accelerated over the causeway.

The cruise ship was off to the left. The area with all the boxes was on
the right, surrounded by a chain-link fence topped with razor wire. I
drove around one time on the access road, wrestling a rising tide of
certainty and a swelling chorus of what sounded like college fight songs
from the Dark Passenger. The road dead-ended at a guard booth well
before I got to the containers. There was a gate with several uniformed
gentlemen lounging about, and no way through without answering some
fairly embarrassing questions. Yes, officer, I wondered if I could come
in and look around? You see, I thought it might be a good place for a
friend of mine to slice up my sister.

I cut through a line of orange cones in the middle of the road thirty
feet from the gate and turned around, back the way I had come. The
cruise ship loomed on the right now. I turned left just before I came to
the bridge back to the mainland and drove into a large area with a
terminal on one end and a chain-link fence on the other. The fence was
gaily decorated with signs that threatened dire punishment to anyone who
strayed into the area, signed by U.S. Customs.

The fence led back to the main road along a large parking lot, empty at
this time of night. I cruised its perimeter slowly, staring at the
containers on the far side. These would be from foreign ports, needing
to go through customs, access tightly controlled. It would be much too
difficult for anyone to get in and out of this area, especially if they
were carrying questionable loads of body parts and the like. I would
either need to find a different area or admit that chasing vague
feelings dredged up from a series of taunting dreams and a scantily clad
doll was a waste of time. And the sooner I admitted that, the better my
chance of finding Deb. She was not here. There was no reason she should be.

At last, a logical thought. I felt better already, and certainly would
have been smug about it—if I had not seen a familiar panel truck parked
right up against the inside of the fence, parked to display the
lettering on the side that said ALLONZO BROTHERS. My private crowd in
the basement of my brain sang too loudly for me to hear myself smirk, so
I pulled over and parked. The clever-boy part of me was knocking on the
front door of my brain and calling out, “Hurry! Hurry! Go-go-go!” But
around back the lizard slithered up to the window and flicked its
cautious tongue, and so I sat for a long moment before I finally climbed
out of the car.

I walked to the fence and stood like a bit-part actor in a World War II
prison camp movie, my fingers locked in the mesh of the fence, peering
hungrily at what lay beyond, only a few impossible yards away. I was
sure that there must be a very simple way for a marvelously intelligent
creature like me to get in, but it was some indication of the state I
was in that I could not seem to fasten one thought onto another. I had
to get in, but I could not. And so I stood there clinging to the fence
and looking in, knowing full well that everything that mattered was
right there, only a few yards away, and I was completely unable to fling
my giant brain at the problem and catch a solution as it bounced back.
The mind picks some very bad times to take a walk, doesn't it?

My backseat alarm clock went off. I had to move away, and right now. I
was standing suspiciously in a well-guarded area, and it was night; any
moment one of the guards was certain to take an interest in the handsome
young man peering intelligently through the fence. I would have to move
on and find some way in as I rolled along in my car. I stepped back from
the fence, giving it one last, loving look. Right there where my feet
had touched the fence, a break was barely visible. The fence links had
been snipped just enough to allow entry for one human being, or even a
good copy like me. The flap was pinned in place by the weight of the
parked truck so it would not swing out and give itself away. It must
have been done recently, this evening, since the truck had arrived.

My final invitation.

I backed away slowly, feeling an automatic hello-there kind of
absentminded smile climb up on my face as a disguise. Hello there,
officer, just out for a walk. Lovely evening for a dismemberment, isn't
it? I cheerfully scuffed over to my car, looking around at nothing but
the moon over the water, whistling a happy tune as I climbed in and
drove away. No one seemed to be paying any attention whatsoever—except,
of course, for the Hallelujah chorus in my mind. I nudged my car into a
parking place over by the cruise ship office, perhaps one hundred yards
from my little handmade gate into Paradise. A few other cars were
scattered nearby. No one would pay any mind to mine.

But as I parked another car slid into the spot next to me, a light blue
Chevy with a woman behind the wheel. I sat still for a moment. So did
she. I opened my door and got out.

So did Detective LaGuerta.

CHAPTER 25

I HAVE ALWAYS BEEN VERY GOOD AT AWKWARD social situations, but I must
admit that this one had me stumped. I just didn't know what to say, and
for a moment I stared at LaGuerta and she looked back at me with her
eyes unblinking and her fangs slightly exposed, like a predatory feline
trying to decide whether to play with you or eat you. I could think of
no remark that did not begin with a stammer, and she seemed interested
only in watching me. So we simply stood there for a long moment. At last
she broke the ice with a light quip.

“What's in there?” she asked, nodding toward the fence, some one hundred
yards away.

“Why, Detective!” I gushed, hoping that she wouldn't notice what she had
said, I suppose. “What are you doing here?”

“I followed you. What's in there?”

“In there?” I said. I know, a really dumb remark, but honestly, I had
just about run out of the smart ones and I can't be expected to come up
with something good under such circumstances.

She cocked her head to one side and poked her tongue out, letting it run
along her bottom lip; slowly to the left, right, left, and back into her
mouth again. Then she nodded. “You must think I'm stupid,” she said. And
of course that thought had crossed my mind fleetingly once or twice, but
it didn't seem politic to say so. “But you got to remember,” she went
on, “I'm a full detective, and this is Miami. How do you think I got
that, huh?”

“Your looks?” I asked, giving her a dashing smile. It never hurts to
compliment a woman.

She showed me her lovely set of teeth, even brighter in the high crime
lights that lit up the parking area. “That's good,” she said, and she
moved her lips into a strange half smile that hollowed her cheeks and
made her look old. “That's the kind of shit I used to fall for when I
thought you liked me.”

“I do like you, Detective,” I told her, perhaps a little too eagerly.
She didn't seem to hear me.

“But then you push me on the floor like I'm some kind of pig, and I
wonder what's wrong with me? I got bad breath? And it hits me. It's not
me. It's you. There's something wrong about you.”

Of course she was right, but it still hurt to hear her say so. “I don't—
What do you mean?”

She shook her head again. “Sergeant Doakes wants to kill you and he
doesn't even know why. I should've listened to him. Something is wrong
about you. And you're connected to this hooker stuff some way.”

“Connected— What do you mean?”

This time there was an edge of savage glee to the smile she showed me
and the trace of accent snuck back into her voice. “You can save the
cute acting for your lawyer. And maybe a judge. 'Cause I think I got you
now.” She looked at me for a long hard moment and her dark eyes
glittered. She looked as inhuman as I am and it made a small shiver run
across the back of my neck. Had I truly underestimated her? Was she
really this good?

“And so you followed me?”

More teeth. “That's right, yeah,” she said. “Why are you looking around
at the fence? What's in there?”

I am sure that under ordinary circumstances I would have thought of this
before, but I plead duress. It truly didn't occur to me until that very
moment. But when it did, it was like a small and painful light flashing
on. “When did you pick me up? At my house? At what time?”

“Why do you keep changing the subject? Something's in there, huh?”

“Detective, please—this could be very important. When and where did you
start to follow me?”

She studied me for a minute, and I began to realize that I had, in fact,
underestimated her. There was a great deal more to this woman than
political instinct. She really did seem to have something extra. I was
still not convinced that any of it was intelligence, but she did have
patience, and sometimes that was more important than smarts in her line
of work. She was willing to simply wait and watch me and keep repeating
her question until she got an answer. And then she would probably ask
the same question a few more times, wait and watch some more, to see
what I would do. Ordinarily I could outwit her, but I could not possibly
outwait her, not tonight. So I put on my best humble face and repeated
myself. “Please, Detective . . .”

She stuck her tongue out again, and then finally put it away. “Okay,”
she said. “When your sister was gone for a few hours and no word where,
I started to think maybe she's up to something. And I know she can't do
anything herself, so where would she go?” She arched an eyebrow at me,
then continued in a triumphant tone. “To your place, that's where! To
talk with you!” She bobbed her head, pleased with her deductive logic.
“And so I think about you for a while. How you're always showing up and
looking, even when you don't have to. How you figure out those serial
killers sometimes, except this one? And then how you fuck me over with
that stupid list, make me look stupid, push me on the fucking floor—”
Her face looked harder, a little older again for a moment. Then she
smiled and went on. “I said something out loud, in my office, and
Sergeant Doakes says, ‘I told you about him but you don't listen.' And
all of a sudden it's your big handsome face all over the place and it
shouldn't be.” She shrugged. “So I went to your place, too.”

“When? At what time, did you notice?”

“Naw,” she said. “But I'm only there like twenty minutes and then you
come out and play with your faggot Barbie doll and then drive over here.”

“Twenty minutes—” So she hadn't been there in time to see who or what
had taken Deborah. And quite probably she was telling the truth and had
simply followed me to see—to see what?

“But why follow me at all?”

She shrugged. “You're connected to this thing. Maybe you didn't do it, I
don't know. But I'm gonna find out. And some of what I find is gonna
stick to you. What's in there, in those boxes? You gonna tell me, or we
just going to stand here all night?”

In her own way, she had put her finger right on it. We could not stand
here all night. We could not, I was sure, stand here much longer at all
before terrible things happened to Deborah. If they hadn't already
happened. We had to go, right now, go find him and stop him. But how did
I do that with LaGuerta along for the ride? I felt like a comet with a
tail I didn't want.

I took a deep breath. Rita had once taken me to a New Age Health
Awareness Workshop which had stressed the importance of deep cleansing
breaths. I took one. I did not feel any cleaner after my breath, but at
least it made my brain whirl into brief action, and I realized I would
have to do something I had rarely done before—tell the truth. LaGuerta
was still staring at me, waiting for an answer.

“I think the killer is in there,” I told LaGuerta. “And I think he has
Officer Morgan.”

She watched me for a moment without moving. “Okay,” she said at last.
“And so you come stand at the fence and look in? 'Cause you love your
sister so much you want to watch?”

“Because I wanted to get in. I was looking for a way in through the fence.”

“Because you forget that you work for the police?”

Well there it was, of course. She had actually jumped right to the real
problem spot, and all by herself, too. I had no good answer for that.
This whole business of telling the truth just never seems to work
without some kind of awkward unpleasantness. “I just—I wanted to be
sure, before I made a big fuss.”

She nodded. “Uh-huh. That's really good,” she said. “But I tell you what
I think. Either you did something bad, or you know about it. And you're
either hiding it, or you wanna find it by yourself.”

“By myself? But why would I want that?”

She shook her head to show how stupid that was. “So you get all the
credit. You and that sister of yours. Think I didn't figure that out? I
told you I'm not stupid.”

“I'm not your slasher, Detective,” I said, throwing myself on her mercy
and now completely confident that she had even less than I did. “But I
think he's in there, in one of the storage boxes.”

She licked her lips. “Why do you think that?”

I hesitated, but she kept her unblinking lizard stare on me. As
uncomfortable as it made me, I had to tell her one more piece of truth.
I nodded at the Allonzo Brothers van parked just inside the fence.
“That's his truck.”

“Ha,” she said, and at last she blinked. Her focus left me for a moment
and seemed to wander away into some deep place. Her hair? Her makeup?
Her career? I couldn't tell. But there were a lot of awkward questions a
good detective might have asked here: How did I know that was his truck?
How had I found it here? Why was I so sure he hadn't simply dumped the
truck and gone somewhere else? But in the final analysis LaGuerta was
not a good detective; she simply nodded, licked her lips again, and
said, “How are we gonna find him in there in all that?”

Clearly, I really had underestimated her. She had gone from “you” to
“we” with no visible transition. “Don't you want to call for backup?” I
asked her. “This is a very dangerous man.” I admit I was only needling
her. But she took it very seriously.

“If I don't catch this guy by myself, in two weeks I'm a meter maid,”
she said. “I got my weapon. Nobody's gonna get away from me. I'll call
for backup when I have him.” She studied me without blinking. “And if
he's not in there, I'll give them you.”

It seemed like a good idea to let that go. “Can you get us through the
gate?”

She laughed. “'Course I can. I got my badge, get us through anywhere.
And then what?”

This was the tricky part. If she went for this, I might well be home
free. “Then we split up and search until we find him.”

She studied me. Again I saw in her face the thing I had seen when she
first got out of her car—the look of a predator weighing her prey,
wondering when and where to strike, and how many claws to use. It was
horrible—I actually found myself warming to the woman. “Okay,” she said
at last, and tilted her head toward her car. “Get in.”

I got in. She drove us back out onto the road and over to the gate. Even
at this hour there was some traffic. Most of it seemed to be people from
Ohio looking for their cruise ship, but a few of them wound up at the
gate, where the guards sent them back the way they came. Detective
LaGuerta cut ahead of them all, bulling her big Chevy to the front of
the line. Their Midwest driving skills were no match for a Miami Cuban
woman with good medical insurance driving a car she didn't care about.
There was a blare of horns and some muffled shouting and we were at the
guard booth.

The guard leaned out, a thin, muscular black man. “Lady, you can't—”

She held up her badge. “Police. Open the gate.” She said it with such
hard-edged authority that I almost jumped out of the car to open the
gate myself.

But the guard froze, took a breath through his mouth, and glanced
nervously back into the booth. “What you want with—”

“Open the fucking gate, Rental,” she told him, jiggling her badge, and
he finally unfroze.

“Lemme see the badge,” he said. LaGuerta held it up limply, making him
take the extra step over to peer at it. He frowned at it and found
nothing to object to. “Uh-huh,” he said. “Can you tell me what you want
in there?”

“I can tell you that if you don't open the gate in two seconds I'm gonna
put you in the trunk of my car and take you downtown to a holding cell
full of gay bikers and then I'm gonna forget where I put you.”

The guard stood up. “Just trying to help,” he said, and called over his
shoulder, “Tavio, open the gate!”

The gate went up and LaGuerta gunned her car through. “Sonnova bitch got
something going he doesn't want me to know about,” she said. There was
amusement in her voice to go with the rising edge of excitement. “But I
don't care about smuggling tonight.” She looked at me. “Where we going?”

“I don't know,” I said. “I guess we should start over where he left his
truck.”

She nodded, accelerating down the path between stacks of storage boxes.
“If he's got a body to carry, he probably parked pretty close to
wherever he was going.” As we got closer to the fence she slowed down,
nosing the car quietly to within fifty feet of the truck and then
stopping. “Let's take a look at the fence,” she said, slamming the
transmission into park and sliding out of the car as it rocked to a stop.

I followed. LaGuerta stepped in something she didn't like and lifted her
foot to look at her shoe. “Goddamint,” she said. I moved past her,
feeling my pulse hammering loud and fast, and went to the truck. I
walked around it, trying the doors. They were locked, and although there
were two small back windows, these were painted over from the inside. I
stood on the bumper and tried to peek in anyway, but there were no holes
in the paint job. There was nothing more to be seen on this side, but I
squatted anyway and looked on the ground. I felt rather than heard
LaGuerta slither up behind me.

“What you got?” she asked, and I stood.

“Nothing,” I said. “The back windows are painted over on the inside.”

“Can you see in the front?”

I went around to the front of the truck. It was bare of any hint as
well. Inside the windshield, a pair of the sunscreens so popular in
Florida had been unfolded across the dashboard, blocking out any
possible view into the cab. I climbed on the front bumper and up onto
the hood, crawled along it from right to left, but there were no gaps in
the sunscreen. “Nothing,” I said and climbed down.

“Okay,” LaGuerta said, looking at me with lidded eyes and just the
smallest tip of her tongue protruding. “Which way you wanna go?”

/This way/, someone whispered deep inside my brain. /Over here./ I
glanced to the right, where the chuckling mental fingers had pointed and
then back to LaGuerta, who was staring at me with her unblinking hungry
tiger stare. “I'll go left and circle around,” I said. “Meet you halfway.”

“Okay,” LaGuerta said with a feral smile. “But I go left.”

I tried to look surprised and unhappy, and I suppose I managed a
reasonable facsimile, because she watched me and then nodded. “Okay,”
she repeated, and turned down the first row of stacked shipping containers.

Then I was alone with my shy interior friend. And now what? Now that I
had tricked LaGuerta into leaving me the right-hand path, what did I do
with it? After all, I had no reason to think it was any better than the
left-hand, or for that matter, better than standing by the fence and
juggling coconuts. There was only my sibilant internal clamor to direct
me, and was that really enough? When you are an icy tower of pure reason
as I have always been, you naturally look for logical hints to direct
your course of action. Just as naturally, you ignore the nonobjective
irrational screeching of loud musical voices from the bottom floor of
your brain that try to send you reeling along the path, no matter how
urgent they have become in the rippling light of the moon.

And as to the rest, the particulars of where I should go now—I looked
around, down the long irregular rows of containers. Off to the side
where LaGuerta had gone spike-heeling along, there were several rows of
brightly colored truck trailers. And in front of me, stretching off to
the right, were the shipping containers.

Suddenly, I was very uncertain. I didn't like the feeling. I closed my
eyes. The moment I did, the whispering became a cloud of sound and
without knowing why I found myself moving toward a clutter of shipping
containers down near the water. I had no conscious notion that these
particular containers were any different or better or that this
direction was more proper or rewarding. My feet simply jerked into
motion and I followed them. It was as if they were tracing some path
only the toes could see, or as if some compelling pattern was being sung
by the whisper-wail of my internal chorus, and my feet translated and
dragged me along.

As they moved the sound grew inside me, a muted hilarious roar, pulling
me faster than my feet, yanking me clumsily down the crooked path
between boxes with powerful invisible jerks. And yet at the same time a
new voice, small and reasonable, was pushing me backward, telling me I
did not want to be here of all places, yammering at me to run, go home,
get away from this place, and it made no more sense than any of the
other voices. I was pulled forward and pushed back at the same time so
powerfully that I could not make my legs work properly and I stumbled
and fell flat-faced onto the hard rocky ground. I rose to my knees,
mouth dry and heart pounding, and paused to finger a rip in my beautiful
Dacron bowling shirt. I pushed my fingertip through the hole and wiggled
it at myself. Hello, Dexter, where are you going? Hello, Mr. Finger. I
don't know, but I'm almost there. I hear my friends calling.

And so I climbed to suddenly unsteady feet and listened. I heard it
clearly now, even with my eyes open, and felt it so strongly I could not
even walk. I stood for a moment, leaning against one of the containers.
A very sobering thought, as if I needed one. Something nameless was born
in this place, something that lived in the darkest hidey-hole of the
thing that was Dexter, and for the first time that I could remember I
was scared. I did not want to be here where horrible things lurked. Yet
I had to be here to find Deborah. I was being ripped in half by an
invisible tug-of-war. I felt like Sigmund Freud's poster child, and I
wanted to go home and go to bed.

But the moon roared in the dark sky above me, the water howled along
Government Cut, and the mild night breeze shrieked over me like a
convention of banshees, forcing my feet forward. And the singing swelled
within me like some kind of gigantic mechanical choir, urging me on,
reminding me of how to move my feet, pushing me lock-kneed down the rows
of boxes. My heart hammered and yammered, my short gasps of breath were
much too loud, and for the first time I could remember I felt weak,
woozy, and stupid—like a human being, like a very small and helpless
human being.

I staggered along the strangely familiar path on borrowed feet until I
could stagger no more and once again I put an arm out to lean against a
box, a box with an air-conditioning compressor attached, pounding away
at the back and mixing with the shriek of the night, all thumping in my
head so loudly now that I could hardly see. And as I leaned against the
box the door swung open.

The inside of the box was lit by a pair of battery-powered hurricane
lamps. Against the back wall there was a temporary operating table made
of packing crates.

And held unmoving in place on the table was my dear sister Deborah.

CHAPTER 26

FOR A FEW SECONDS IT DIDN'T REALLY SEEM necessary to breathe. I just
looked. Long, slick strands of duct tape wrapped around my sister's arms
and legs. She wore gold lamé hot pants and a skimpy silk blouse tied
above her navel. Her hair was pulled back tight, her eyes were
unnaturally wide, and she breathed rapidly through her nose, since her
mouth, too, was held closed by a strip of duct tape that went across her
lips and down to the table to hold her head still.

I tried to think of something to say, but realized my mouth was too dry
to say it and so I just looked. Deborah looked back. There were many
things in her eyes, but the plainest was fear, and that held me there in
the doorway. I had never seen that look on her before and I was not sure
what to think about it. I took half a step toward Deborah and she
flinched against the duct tape. Afraid? Of course—but afraid of me? I
was here to rescue her, most likely. Why should she be afraid of me? Unless—

Had I done this?

During my little “nap” earlier this evening what if Deborah had arrived
at my apartment, as scheduled, and found my Dark Passenger behind the
wheel of the Dexter-mobile? And unknown to me I had brought her here and
taped her so tantalizingly to the table without consciously realizing
it—which made absolutely no sense, naturally. Had I raced home and left
myself the Barbie doll, then gone upstairs and flopped on the bed and
woke up as “me” again, like I was running some kind of homicidal relay
race? Impossible: but . . .

How else had I known to come here?

I shook my head; there was no way I could have picked this one cold box
out of all the places in Miami, unless I already knew where it was. And
I did. The only way that could be possible was if I had been here
before. And if not tonight with Deb, then when and with whom?

“I was almost sure this was the right spot,” a voice said, a voice so
very like my own that for a moment I thought I had said it, and I
wondered what I meant by that.

The hair went up on the back of my neck and I took another half step
toward Deborah—and he came forward out of the shadow. The soft light of
the lanterns lit him up and our eyes met; for a moment the room spun
back and forth and I did not quite know where I was. My sight shifted
between me at the door and him at the small makeshift worktable, and I
saw me seeing him, then I saw him seeing me. In a blinding flash I saw
me on the floor, sitting still and unmoving, and I did not know what
that vision meant. Very unsettling—and then I was myself again, although
I was somewhat uncertain what that meant.

“Almost sure,” he said again, a soft and happy voice like Mr. Rogers's
troubled child. “But now here you are, so this must be the right place.
Don't you think?”

There is no pretty way for me to say this, but the truth is, I stared at
him with my mouth hanging open. I am quite sure I was almost drooling. I
just stared. It was him. There was no question about it. Here was the
man in the pictures we had found on the webcam, the man both Deb and I
had thought might very well be me.

This close I could see that he was not, in fact, me; not quite, and I
felt a small wave of gratitude at that realization. Hurray—I was someone
else. I was not completely crazy yet. Seriously antisocial, of course,
and somewhat sporadically homicidal, nothing wrong with that. But not
crazy. There was somebody else, and he was not me. Three cheers for
Dexter's brain.

But he was very much like me. Perhaps an inch or two taller, thicker
through the shoulders and chest as though he had been doing a great deal
of heavy weight lifting. That, combined with the paleness of his face,
made me think that he might have been in prison recently. Behind the
pallor, though, his face was very similar to mine; the same nose and
cheekbones, the same look in the eyes that said the lights were on but
nobody was home. Even his hair had the same awkward half wave to it. He
did not really look like me, but very similar.

“Yes,” he said. “It is a little bit of a shock the first time, isn't it?”

“Just a little,” I said. “Who are you? And why is all this so—” I left
it unfinished, because I did not know what all this was.

He made a face, a very Dexter-disappointed face. “Oh, dear. And I was so
sure you had figured it out.”

I shook my head. “I don't even know how I got here,” I said.

He smiled softly. “Somebody else driving tonight?” As the hair stood up
on the back of my neck he chuckled just a little, a mechanical sound
that was not worth mentioning—except that the lizard voice from the
underside of my brain matched it note for note. “And it isn't even a
full moon, is it?”

“But not actually an empty moon,” I said. Hardly great wit, but some
kind of attempt, which under the circumstances seemed significant. And I
realized that I was half drunk with the realization that here at last
was someone who /knew/. He was not making idle remarks that
coincidentally stabbed into my own personal bull's-eye. It was his
bull's-eye, too. He knew. For the first time I could look across the
gigantic gulf between my eyes and someone else's and say without any
kind of worry, /He is like me/.

Whatever it was that I was, he was one, too.

“But seriously,” I said. “Who are you?”

His face stretched into a Dexter-the-Cheshire-Cat smile, but because it
was so much like my own I could see there was no real happiness behind
it. “What do you remember from before?” he said. And the echo of that
question bounced off the container's walls and nearly shattered my brain.

CHAPTER 27

WHAT DO YOU REMEMBER FROM BEFORE? HARRY had asked me.

/Nothing, Dad./

Except—

Images tugged at my underbrain. Mental pictures—dreams? memories?—very
clear visions, whatever they were. And they were here—this room? No;
impossible. This box could not have been here very long, and I had
certainly never been in it before. But the tightness of the space, the
cool air flowing from the thumping compressor, the dim light—everything
called out to me in a symphony of homecoming. Of course it had not been
this same box—but the pictures were so clear, so similar, so completely
almost-right, except for—

I blinked; an image fluttered behind my eyes. I closed them.

/And the inside of a different box jumped back out at me. There were no
cartons in this other box. And there were—things over there. Over by . .
. Mommy? I could see her face there, and she was somehow hiding and
peeking up over the—things—just her face showing, her unwinking
unblinking unmoving face. And I wanted to laugh at first, because Mommy
had hidden so well. I could not see the rest of her, just her face. She
must have made a hole in the floor. She must be hiding in the hole and
peeking up—but why didn't she answer me now that I saw her? Why didn't
she even wink? And even when I called her really loud she didn't answer,
didn't move, didn't do anything but look at me. And without Mommy, I was
alone./

/But no—not quite alone. I turned my head and the memory turned with me.
I was not alone. Someone was with me. Very confusing at first, because
it was me—but it was someone else—but it looked like me—but we both
looked like me—/

/But what were we doing here in this box? And why wasn't Mommy moving?
She should help us. We were sitting here in a deep puddle, of, of—Mommy
should move, get us out of this, this—/

“Blood . . . ?” I whispered.

“You remembered,” he said behind me. “I'm so happy.”

I opened my eyes. My head was pounding hideously. I could almost see the
other room superimposed on this one. And in this other room tiny Dexter
sat right /there/. I could put my feet on the spot. And the other me sat
beside me, but he was not me, of course; he was some other someone, a
someone I knew as well as myself, a someone named—

“Biney . . . ?” I said hesitantly. The sound was the same, but the name
did not seem quite right.

He nodded happily. “That's what you called me. At the time you had
trouble saying Brian. You said Biney.” He patted my hand. “That's all
right. It's nice to have a nickname.” He paused, his face smiling but
his eyes locked onto my face. “Little brother.”

I sat down. He sat next to me.

“What—” was all I could manage to say.

“Brother,” he repeated. “Irish twins. You were born only one year after
me. Our mother was somewhat careless.” His face twisted into a hideous,
very happy smile. “In more ways than one,” he said.

I tried to swallow. It didn't work. He—Brian—my brother—went on.

“I'm just guessing with some of this,” he said. “But I had a little time
on my hands, and when I was encouraged to learn a useful trade, I did. I
got very good at finding things with the computer. I found the old
police files. Mommy dearest hung out with a very naughty crowd. In the
import business, just like me. Of course, their product was a little
more sensitive.” He reached behind him into a carton and pulled out a
handful of hats with a springing panther on them. “My things are made in
Taiwan. Theirs came from Colombia. My best guess is that Mumsy and her
friends tried a little independent project with some product that
strictly speaking did not actually belong to her, and her business
associates were unhappy with her spirit of independence and decided to
discourage her.”

He put the hats carefully back in the carton and I felt him looking at
me, but I could not even turn my head. After a moment he looked away.

“They found us here,” he said. “Right here.” His hand went to the floor
and touched the exact spot where the small other not-me had been sitting
in that long-ago other box. “Two and a half days later. Stuck to the
floor in dried blood, an inch deep.” His voice here was grating,
horrible; he said that awful word, /blood/, just the way I would have
said it, with contemptuous and utter loathing. “According to the police
reports, there were several men here, too. Probably three or four. One
or more of them may well have been our father. Of course, the chain saw
made identification very difficult. But they are fairly sure there was
only one woman. Our dear old mother. You were three years old. I was four.”

“But,” I said. Nothing else came out.

“Quite true,” Brian told me. “And you were very hard to find, too. They
are so fussy with adoption records in this state. But I did find you,
little brother. I did, didn't I?” Once again he patted my hand, a
strange gesture I had never seen from anyone in my life. Of course, I
had never before seen a flesh-and-blood sibling, either. Perhaps
hand-patting was something I should practice with my brother, or with
Deborah—and I realized with a small flutter of concern that I had
forgotten all about Deborah.

I looked over at her, some six feet away, all neatly taped into place.

“She's fine,” my brother said. “I didn't want to begin without you.”

It may seem a very strange thing for my first coherent question, but I
asked him, “How did you know I would want to?” Which perhaps made it
sound as though I truly did want to—and of course I didn't really want
to explore Deborah. Certainly not. And yet—here was my big brother,
wanting to play, surely a rare enough opportunity. More than our ties of
mutual parent, far more, was the fact that he was like me. “You couldn't
really know,” I said, sounding far more uncertain than I would have
thought possible.

“I didn't know,” he said. “But I thought there was a very good chance.
The same thing happened to both of us.” His smile broadened and he
lifted a forefinger into the air. “The Traumatic Event—you know that
term? Have you done any reading on monsters like us?”

“Yes,” I said. “And Harry—my foster father—but he would never say
exactly what had happened.”

Brian waved a hand around at the interior of the little box. “This
happened, little brother. The chain saw, the flying body parts, the . .
. /blood/—” With that same fearful emphasis again. “Two and a half days
of sitting in the stuff. A wonder we survived at all, isn't it? Almost
enough to make you believe in God.” His eyes glittered and, for some
reason or other, Deborah squirmed and made a muffled noise. He ignored
her. “They thought you were young enough to recover. I was just a bit
over the age limit. But we both suffered a classic Traumatic Event. All
the literature agrees. It made me what I am—and I had a thought that it
might do the same for you.”

“It did,” I said, “exactly the same.”

“Isn't that nice,” he said. “Family ties.”

I looked at him. My brother. That alien word. If I had said it aloud I
am sure I would have stuttered. It was utterly impossible to believe—and
even more absurd to deny it. He looked like me. We liked the same
things. He even had my wretched taste in jokes.

“I just—” I shook my head.

“Yes,” he said. “It takes a minute to get used to the idea that there
are two of us, doesn't it?”

“Perhaps slightly longer,” I said. “I don't know if I—”

“Oh, dear, are we being squeamish? After what happened? Two and a half
days of sitting here, bubba. Two little boys, sitting for two and a half
days in /blood/,” he said, and I felt sick, dizzy, heart floundering,
head hammering.

“No,” I gagged, and I felt his hand on my shoulder.

“It doesn't matter,” he said. “What matters is what happens now.”

“What—happens,” I said.

“Yes. What happens. Now.” He made a small, strange, snuffling, gurgling
noise that was surely intended to sound like laughter, but perhaps he
had not learned to fake it as well as I had. “I think I should say
something like: My whole life has been leading up to this!” He repeated
the snuffling sound. “Of course, neither one of us could manage that
with real feeling. After all, we can't actually feel anything, can we?
We've both spent our lives playing a part. Moving through this world
reciting lines and pretending we belong in a world made for human
beings, and never really human ourselves. And always, forever, reaching
for a way to /feel/ something! Reaching, little brother, for a moment
just like this! Real, genuine, unfaked feeling! It takes your breath
away, doesn't it?”

And it did. My head was whirling and I did not dare to close my eyes
again for fear of what might be waiting there for me. And, far worse, my
brother was right beside me, watching me, demanding that I be myself, be
just like him. And to be myself, to be his brother, to be who I was, I
had to, had to—what? My eyes turned, all by themselves, toward Deborah.

“Yes,” he said, and all the cold happy fury of the Dark Passenger was in
his voice now. “I knew you'd figure it out. This time we do it
together,” he said.

I shook my head, but not very convincingly. “I can't,” I said.

“You have to,” he said, and we were both right. The feather touch on my
shoulder again, almost matching the push from Harry that he could never
understand and yet seemed every bit as powerful as my brother's hand, as
it lifted me to my feet and pushed me forward; one step, two—Deborah's
unblinking eyes were locked onto mine, but with that other presence
behind me I couldn't tell her that I was certainly not going to—

“Together,” he said. “One more time. Out with the old. In with the new.
Onward, upward, inward—!” Another half step—Deborah's eyes were yelling
at me, but—

He was beside me now, standing with me, and something gleamed in his
hand, two somethings. “One for all, both for one— Did you ever read /The
Three Musketeers/?” He flipped one knife into the air; it arced up and
into his left hand and he held it out toward me. The weak dim light grew
on the flat of the blades he held up and burned into me, matched only by
the gleam in Brian's eyes. “Come on, Dexter. Little brother. Take the
knife.” His teeth shone like the knives. “Showtime.”

Deborah in her tightly wrapped tape made a thrashing sound. I looked up
at her. There was frantic impatience in her eyes, and a growing madness,
too. Come on, Dexter! Was I really thinking of doing this to her? Cut
her loose and let's go home. Okay, Dexter? Dexter? Hello, Dexter? It is
you, isn't it?

And I didn't know.

“Dexter,” Brian said. “Of course I don't mean to influence your
decision. But ever since I learned I had a brother just like me, this is
all I could think about. And you feel the same, I can see it in your face.”

“Yes,” I said, still not taking my eyes off Deb's very anxious face,
“but does it have to be her?”

“Why not her? What is she to you?”

What indeed. My eyes were locked onto Deborah's. She was not actually my
sister, not really, not a real relation of any kind, not at all. Of
course I was very fond of her, but—

But what? Why did I hesitate? Of course the thing was impossible. I knew
it was unthinkable, even as I thought it. Not just because it was Deb,
although it was, of course. But such a strange thought came into my poor
dismal battered head and I could not bat it away: /What would Harry say?/

And so I stood uncertain, because no matter how much I wanted to begin I
knew what Harry would say. He had already said it. It was unchangeable
Harry truth: /Chop up the bad guys, Dexter. Don't chop up your sister/.
But Harry had never foreseen anything like this—how could he? He had
never imagined when he wrote the Code of Harry that I would be faced
with a choice like this; to side with Deborah—not my real sister—or to
join my authentic 100 percent real live brother in a game that I so very
much wanted to play. And Harry could not have conceived that when he set
me on my path. Harry had never known that I had a brother who would—

But wait a moment. Hold the phone, please. Harry did know—Harry had been
there when it happened, hadn't he? And he had kept it to himself, never
told me I had a brother. All those lonely empty years when I thought I
was the only me there was—and he knew I was not, knew and had not told
me. The most important single fact about me—I was not alone—and he had
kept it from me. What did I really owe Harry now, after this fantastic
betrayal?

And more to the immediate point, what did I owe this squirming lump of
animal flesh quivering beneath me, this creature masquerading as my
sibling? What could I possibly owe her in comparison to my bond with
Brian, my own flesh, my brother, a living replication of my selfsame
precious DNA?

A drop of sweat rolled across Deborah's forehead and into her eye. She
blinked at it frantically, making ugly squinting faces in an effort to
keep watching me and clear the sweat out of her eye at the same time.
She really looked somewhat pathetic, helplessly taped and struggling
like a dumb animal; a dumb, human animal. Not at all like me, like my
brother; not at all clever clean no-mess bloodless razor-sharp
Moondancer snicker-snee Dexter and his very own brother.

“Well?” he said, and I heard impatience, judgment, the beginning of
disappointment.

I closed my eyes. The room dove around me, got darker, and I could not
move. There was Mommy watching me, unblinking. I opened my eyes. My
brother stood so close behind me I could feel his breath on my neck. My
sister looked up at me, her eyes as wide and unblinking as Mommy's. And
the look she gave me held me, as Mommy's had held me. I closed my eyes;
Mommy. I opened my eyes; Deborah.

I took the knife.

There was a small noise and a rush of warm wind came into the cool air
of the box. I spun around.

LaGuerta stood in the doorway, a nasty little automatic pistol in her hand.

“I knew you'd try this,” she said. “I should shoot you both. Maybe all
three,” she said, glancing at Deborah, then back at me. “Hah,” she said,
looking at the blade in my hand. “Sergeant Doakes should see this. He
was right about you.” And she pointed the gun toward me, just for half a
second.

It was long enough. Brian moved fast, faster than I would have thought
possible. Still, LaGuerta got off one shot and Brian stumbled slightly
as he slid the blade into LaGuerta's midsection. For a moment they stood
like that, and then both of them were on the floor, unmoving.

A small pool of blood began to spread across the floor, the mingled
blood of them both, Brian and LaGuerta. It was not deep, it did not
spread far, but I shrank away from it, the horrible stuff, with
something very near to panic. I only took two backward steps and then I
bumped into something that made muffled sounds to match my own panic.

Deborah. I ripped the duct tape off her mouth.

“Jesus Christ that hurt,” she said. “For God's sake let me out of this
shit and quit acting like a fucking lunatic.”

I looked down at Deborah. The tape had left a ring of blood around the
outside of her lips, awful red blood that drove me back behind my eyes
and into the yesterday box with Mommy. And she lay there—just like
Mommy. Just like last time with the cool air of the box lifting the hair
on my neck and the dark shadows chattering around us. Just exactly like
last time in the way she lay there all taped and staring and waiting
like some kind of—

“Goddamn it,” she said. “Come on, Dex. Snap out of it.”

And yet this time I had a knife, and she was still helpless, and I could
change everything now, I could—

“Dexter?” said Mommy.

I mean, Deborah. Of course that's what I meant. Not Mommy at all who had
left us here in this same place just like this, left us in this place
where it began and now might finally finish, with a burning absolutely
must-do-it already on its large dark horse and galloping along under the
wonderful moon and the one thousand intimate voices whispering, /Do
it—do it now—do it and everything can change—the way it should be—back
with—/

“Mommy?” someone said.

“Dexter, come on,” said Mommy. I mean Deborah. But the knife was moving.
“Dexter, for Christ's sake, cut the shit! It's me! Debbie!”

I shook my head and of course it was Deborah, but I could not stop the
knife. “I know, Deb. I'm really very sorry.” The knife crept higher. I
could only watch it, couldn't stop it now for anything. One small
spiderweb touch of Harry still whipped at me, demanding that I pay
attention and get squared away, but it was so small and weak, and the
need was big, strong, stronger than it had ever been before, because
this was everything, the beginning and the end, and it lifted me up and
out of myself and sent me washing away down the tunnel between the boy
in the blood and the last chance to make it right. This would change
everything, would pay back Mommy, would show her what she had done.
Because Mommy should have saved us, and this time had to be different.
Even Deb had to see that.

“Put the knife down, Dexter.” Her voice was a little calmer now, but
those other voices were so much louder that I could barely hear her. I
tried to put the knife down, really I did, but I only managed to lower
it a few inches.

“I'm sorry, Deb, I just can't,” I said, fighting to speak at all with
the rising howl around me of the storm that had built for twenty-five
years—and now with my brother and me brought together like thunderheads
on a dark and moony night—

“Dexter!” said wicked Mommy, who wanted to leave us here alone in the
awful cold blood, and the voice of my brother inside hissed out with
mine, “Bitch!” and the knife went all the way back up—

A noise came from the floor. LaGuerta? I couldn't tell, and it didn't
matter. I had to finish, had to do this, had to let this happen now.

“Dexter,” Debbie said. “I'm your sister. You don't want to do this to
me. What would Daddy say?” And that hurt, I'll admit it, but— “Put down
the knife, Dexter.”

Another sound behind me, and a small gurgle. The knife in my hand went up.

“Dexter, look out!” Deborah said and I turned.

Detective LaGuerta was on one knee, gasping, straining to raise her
suddenly very heavy weapon. Up came the barrel, slowly, slowly—pointed
at my foot, my knee—

But did it matter? Because this was going to happen now no matter what
and even though I could see LaGuerta's finger tighten on the trigger the
knife in my hand did not even slow down.

“She's going to shoot you, Dex!” Deb called, sounding somewhat frantic
now. And the gun was pointed at my navel, LaGuerta's face was screwing
itself into a frown of tremendous concentration and effort and she
really was going to shoot me. I half turned toward LaGuerta but my knife
was still fighting its way down toward—

“Dexter!” said Mommy/Deborah on the table, but the Dark Passenger called
louder and moved forward, grabbing my hand and guiding the knife down—

“Dex—!”

“/You're a good kid, Dex/,” whispered Harry from behind in his
feather-hard ghost voice, just enough to twitch the knife so very little
up again.

“I can't help it,” I whispered back, so very much growing into the
handle of the quivering blade.

“/Choose what . . . or WHO . . . you kill/,” he said with the hard and
endless blue of his eyes now watching me from Deborah's same eyes,
watching now loud enough to push the knife a full half inch away.
“/There are plenty of people who deserve it/,” said Harry so softly
above the rising angry yammer of the stampede inside.

The tip of the knife winked and froze in place. The Dark Passenger could
not send it down. Harry could not pull it away. And there we were.

Behind me I heard a rasping sound, a heavy thump, and then a moan so
very full of emptiness that it crawled across my shoulders like a silk
scarf on spider legs. I turned.

LaGuerta lay with her gun hand stretched out, pinned to the floor by
Brian's knife, her lower lip trapped between her teeth and her eyes
alive with pain. Brian crouched beside her, watching the fear scamper
across her face. He was breathing hard through a dark smile.

“Shall we clean up, brother?” he said.

“I . . . can't,” I said.

My brother lurched to his feet and stood in front of me, weaving
slightly from side to side. “Can't?” he said. “I don't think I know that
word.” He pried the knife from my fingers and I could not stop him and I
could not help him.

His eyes were on Deborah now, but his voice whipped across me and
blasted at the phantom Harry fingers on my shoulder. “Must, little
brother. Absolutely /must/. No other way.” He gasped and bent double for
a moment, slowly straightening, slowly raising the knife. “Do I have to
remind you of the importance of family?”

“No,” I said, with both my families, living and dead, crowded around me
clamoring for me to do and not do. And with one last whisper from the
Harry-blue eyes of my memory, my head began to shake all by itself and I
said it again, “No,” and this time I meant it, “No. I can't. Not Deborah.”

My brother looked at me. “Too bad,” he said. “I'm so disappointed.”

And the knife came down.

EPILOGUE

I KNOW IT IS A NEARLY HUMAN WEAKNESS, AND IT may be no more than
ordinary sentimentality, but I have always loved funerals. For one thing
they are so clean, so neat, so completely given over to careful
ceremonies. And this was really a very good one. It had rows of
blue-uniformed policemen and -women, looking solemn and neat and—well,
ceremonial. There was the ritual salute with the guns, the careful
folding of the flag, all the trimmings—a proper and wonderful show for
the deceased. She had been, after all, one of our own, a woman who had
served with the few, the proud. Or is that the marines? No matter, she
had been a Miami cop, and Miami cops know how to throw a funeral for one
of their own. They have had so much practice.

“Oh, Deborah,” I sighed, very softly, and of course I knew she couldn't
hear me, but it really did seem like the right thing to do, and I wanted
to do this right.

I almost wished I could summon up a tear or two to wipe away. She and I
had been very close. And it had been a messy and unpleasant death, no
way for a cop to go, hacked to death by a homicidal maniac. Rescue had
come too late; it was all over long before anyone could get to her. And
yet, by her example of selfless courage, she had helped to show how a
cop should live and die. I'm quoting, of course, but that's the gist of
it. Really very good stuff, quite moving if one has anything inside that
can be moved. Which I don't, but I know it when I hear it and this was
the real thing. And very much caught up in the silent bravery of the
officers in their clean blues and the weeping of the civilians, I could
not help myself. I sighed heavily. “Oh, Deborah,” I sighed, a little
louder this time, almost feeling it. “Dear, dear Deborah.”

“Quiet, you moron!” she whispered, and poked me hard with her elbow. She
looked lovely in her new outfit—a sergeant at last, the least they could
do for her after all her hard work identifying and nearly catching the
Tamiami Slasher. With the APB out on him, no doubt they would find my
poor brother sooner or later—if he didn't find them first, of course.
Since I had just been reminded so forcefully that family is important, I
did hope he could stay free. And Deborah would come around, now that she
had accepted her promotion. She really wanted to forgive me, and she was
already more than half convinced of the Wisdom of Harry. We were family,
too, and that had shown in the end, hadn't it? It was not such a great
leap to accept me as I was after all, was it? Things being what they
are. What they have, in fact, always been.

I sighed again. “Quit it!” she hissed, and nodded at the far end of the
line of stiff Miami cops. I glanced where she indicated; Sergeant Doakes
glared at me. He had not taken his eyes off me, not once the whole time,
even when he had dropped his handful of earth on Detective LaGuerta's
coffin. He was so very sure that things were not what they seemed. I
knew with a total certainty that he would come for me now, track me like
the hound he was, snort at my footsteps and sniff my back trail and hunt
me down, bring me to bay for what I had done and what I would quite
naturally do again.

I squeezed my sister's hand and with my other hand I fingered the cool
hard edge of the glass slide in my pocket, one small drop of dried blood
that would not go into the grave with LaGuerta but live forever on my
shelf. It gave me comfort, and I did not mind Sergeant Doakes, or
whatever he thought or did. How could I mind? He could no more control
who he was and what he did than anyone else could. He would come for me.
Truly, what else could he do?

What can any of us do? Helpless as we all are, in the grip of our own
little voices, what indeed can we do?

I really wished I could shed a tear. It was all so beautiful. As
beautiful as the next full moon would be, when I would call on Sergeant
Doakes. And things would go on as they were, as they had always been,
beneath that lovely bright moon.

The wonderful, fat, musical red moon.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

JEFF LINDSAY lives in South Florida with his wife and three daughters.
He is currently finishing a second novel featuring Dexter.

