
  SON OF A WITCH


    A NOVEL


  Gregory Maguire

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

 THANKS ARE DUE to the team at ReganBooks, starting with Judith Regan
and including Cassie Jones, Paul Olsewski, and Jennifer Suitor.

 Thank you to David Groff, Betty Levin, Andy Newman, and William Reiss
for commenting on early drafts of Son of a Witch .

 Thank you to Haven Kimmel and to Eve Ensler, for encouraging words sent
at precisely the right moment.

 Thank you to Harriet Barlow, Ben Strader, and the company of Blue
Mountain Center, New York.

 Thank you, again, to Andy Newman, for defending the ramparts as usual,
and to Lori Shelly, for able assistance at every wicked little thing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A DF Books NERD's Release  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

 GREGORY MAGUIRE is the bestselling author of Son of a Witch ,Confessions
of an Ugly Stepsister, Lost, Mirror Mirror, and Wicked: The Life and
Times of the Wicked Witch of the West, the basis for the Tony
Award-winning Broadway musical of the same name. Maguire has lectured on
art and culture at the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum and the DeCordova
Museum as well as at conferences at home and abroad. An occasional
reviewer for theNew York Times Book Review, he lives with his family
near Boston, Massachusetts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ALSO BY GREGORY MAGUIRE

 Wicked

 Confessions of an Ugly Stepsister

 Lost

 Mirror Mirror

------------------------------------------------------------------------

_Copyright_

 SON OF A WITCH. Copyright © 2005 by Gregory Maguire. All rights
reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By
payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive,
non-transferable right to access and read the text of this e-book
on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted,
down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced
into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any
means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins
Publishers, Inc.

 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

 Maguire, Gregory.

 Son of a witch : a novel / Gregory Maguire.

p. cm.

 ISBN 0-06-054893-2 (cloth)

 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

L. FRANK BAUM'S second Oz novel,The Marvelous Land of Oz(1904), was
dedicated to the actors David C. Montgomery and Fred A. Stone, who
performed the roles of the Tin Woodman and the Scarecrow in the first
theatrical version ofThe Wizard of Oz.

 In that spirit,Son of a Witch is dedicated to the cast and creative
team of the musicalWicked, which opened on Broadway in October 2003--the
night before Halloween.

 To Winnie Holzman and Stephen Schwartz, foremost and first, for their
vision; to Wayne Cilento, Susan Hilferty, Eugene Lee, Joe Mantello,
Stephen Oremus, Kenneth Posner, and Marc Platt and his associates, for
bringing visions to life; and, among all the capable cast, most
especially to Kristin Chenoweth (Galinda/Glinda), Joel Grey (The
Wizard), and Idina Menzel (Elphaba), for bringing life to visions.

 IHAVE NO FEARthat the poetry of democratic peoples will be found timid
or that it will stick too close to the earth.

I am much more afraid that it... y finish up by describing an entirely
fictitious country.

--Alexis de Tocqueville,

Democracy in America, 1835, 1840

 ALL COWS_were like all other cows,_all tigers like all other
tigers--what on earth has happened to human beings?

--Harry Mulisch,

Siegfried, 2001


------------------------------------------------------------------------

Contents

_ Map_

_L. F_RANK BAUM'S_second Oz novel,_The Marvelous Land of Oz... I HAVE NO FEAR_... 
_A_LL COWS_were like all other cows... 
_Under the Jackal Moon_

_The House of Saint Glinda_

_Abroad_

_Southstairs_

_The Service_

_The Emperor Apostle_

_One Plus One Equals Both_

_The Conference of the Birds_

_Kumbricia's Cradle_

_Dragonfings_

_Siege_

_The Eye of the Witch_

_Raising Voices_

_No Place Like It_

_Acknowledgments_

_About the Author_

_Also by Gregory Maguire_

_Copyright_

_About the Publisher_


------------------------------------------------------------------------

MAP

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Under the Jackal Moon

_ The House of Saint Glinda_

 1

 SO THE TALK OF RANDOM BRUTALITY wasn't just talk. At noontime they
discovered the bodies of three young women, out on some mission of
conversion that appeared to have gone awry. The novice maunts had been
strangled by their ropes of holy beads, and their faces removed.

 Her nerve being shaken at last, Oatsie Manglehand now caved in to the
demands of her paying customers. She told the team drivers they'd pause
only long enough to dig some shallow graves while the horses slaked
their thirst. Then the caravan would press on across the scrubby flats
known, for the failed farmsteads abandoned here and there, as the
Disappointments.

 Moving by night, at least they wouldn't make a sitting target, though
they might as easily wander into trouble as sidestep it. Still, Oatsie's
party was antsy. Hunker down all night and wait for horse hoofs, spears?
Too hard on everyone. Oatsie consoled herself: If the caravan kept
moving, she could sit forward with her eyes peeled, out of range of the
carping, the second-guessing, the worrying.

 With the benefit of height, therefore, Oatsie spotted the gully before
anyone else did. The cloudburst at sunset had fed a small trackside
rivulet that flowed around a flank of skin, water-lacquered in the new
moonlight. An island, she feared, of human flesh.

 I ought to turn aside before the others notice, she thought; how much
more can they take? There is nothing I can do for that human soul. The
digging of another trench would require an hour, minimum. An additional
few moments for prayers. The project would only further agitate these
clients as they obsess about their own precious mortality.

 Upon the knee of the horizon balanced the head of a jackal moon,
so-called because, once every generation or so, a smear of celestial
flotsam converged behind the crescent moon of early autumn. The impact
was creepy, a look of a brow and a snout. As the moon rounded out over a
period of weeks, the starveling would turn into a successful hunter, its
cheeks bulging.

 Always a fearsome sight, the jackal moon tonight spooked Oatsie
Manglehand further.Don't stop for this next casualty. Get through the
Disappointments, deliver these paying customers to the gates of the
Emerald City . But she resisted giving in to superstition. Be scared of
the real jackals, she reminded herself, not frets and nocturnal portents.

 In any case, the light of the constellation alleviated some of the
color blindness that sets in at night. The body was pale, almost
luminous. Oatsie might divert the Grasstrail Train and give the corpse a
wide berth before anyone else noticed it, but the slope of the person's
shoulders, the unnatural twist of legs--the jackal moon made her read the
figure too well, as too clearly human, for her to be able to turn aside.

 "Nubb," she barked to her second, "rein in. We'll pull into flank
formation up that rise. There's another fatality, there in the runoff."

 Cries of alarm as the news passed back, and another mutter of mutiny:
Why should they stop?--were they to bear witness to every fresh atrocity?
Oatsie didn't listen. She yanked the reins of her team of horses, to
halt them, and she lowered herself gingerly. She stumped, her hand on
her sore hip, until she stood a few feet over the body.

 Face down and genitals hidden, he appeared to have been a young man. A
few scraps of fabric were still knotted about his waist, and a boot some
yards distant, but he was otherwise naked, and no sign of his clothes.

 Curious: no evidence of the assassins. Neither had there been about the
bodies of the maunts, but that was on rockier ground, in a drier hour.
Oatsie couldn't see any sign of scuffle here, and in the mud of the
gulch one might have expected... mething. The body wasn’t'bloody, nor
decayed yet; the murder was recent. Perhaps this evening, perhaps only
an hour ago.

 "Nubb, let's heave him up and see if they've taken his face," she said.

 "No blood," said Nubb.

 "Blood may have run off in that cloudburst. Steel yourself, now."

 They got on either side of the body and bit their lips. She looked at
Nubb, meaning: It's only the next thing, it's not the last thing. Let's
get through this, fellow.

 She jerked her head in the direction of the hoist. One, two, heave.

 They got him up. His head had fallen into a natural scoop in the stone,
a few inches higher than where the rain had pooled. His face was intact,
more or less; that is to say, it was still there, though shattered.

 "How did he get here?" said Nubb. "And why didn't they scrape him?"

 Oatsie just shook her head. She settled on her haunches. Her travelers
had come forward and were congregating on the rise behind her; she could
hear them rustling. She suspected that they had gathered stones, and
were ready to kill her if she insisted on a burial.

 The jackal moon rose a few notches higher, as if trying to see into the
gulley. The prurience of the heavens!

 "We're not going to dig another grave." That from her noisiest client,
a wealthy trader from the northern Vinkus. "Not his, Oatsie Manglehand,
and not yours, either. We're not doing it. We leave him unburied and
alone, or we leave him unburied with your corpse for company."

 "We don't need to do either," said Oatsie. She sighed. "Poor, poor
soul, whoever he is. He needs no grave. He isn't dead yet."

 2

 IN TIME,when the travelers had rejoined their cronies and relatives in
the Emerald City--in salons, in public houses, in taverns of
exchange--they heard more chatter about the hostilities they had managed
to sidestep. Rumor flourished. Forty, sixty, a hundred deaths resulting
from the skirmishes between the Scrow and the Yunamata. Barbarians, the
lot of them: They deserved to kill off each other. But not us.

 Rumor could be wrong, of course, but it couldn't be uninteresting. Two
hundred dead. Twice that. Mass graves, and they would be foundany day .

 But the luxury of safety came later. First, the Grasstrail Train still
had to resume its snail's progress through the Disappointments.
Geographical variety--the hills, mountains, dales and forests that made
the rest of Oz so memorable, such a heartland--was in short supply here.
Just flats, shales, more flats, grey as pulped newspapers.

 The prospect was dispiriting, and the notion of having to carry an
invalid with them didn't improve matters. Oatsie Manglehand's clients
had paid good hard cash for her service. Some originating from as far
away as Ugabu, and others having joined the group along the eastern
foothills of the Great Kells, they considered their own safe travel
should be Oatsie's sole concern.

 Oatsie reminded them that they didn't have a vote. She'd never
represented that her clients would travel unencumbered by waifs and
strays. Indeed, by terms of their contracts, she was free of liability
should any of the travelers be murdered on the trail by a fellow
passenger, a stowaway, a hitchhiker, a native. Oatsie had promised to
lead the caravan as safely as she could, relying on her knowledge of the
terrain and its populations. That was it. Period. To that end, she'd
chosen a new route intended to avoid the current hot spots of
intertribal conflict, and so far so good. Right?

 The invalid was loaded aboard.

 Despite her bravado, Oatsie was indeed sensitive to her clients' fears,
and in a way she was glad to have the unconscious young man with them.
It distracted the travelers, while he remained oblivious of their
resentment.

 She bedded him in the third carriage back, requisitioning from her
clients the warmest of winter robes. She mounded him into a cocoon.
There he languished, day and night, not so much fevered as feverless--an
equally worrying condition. After a day of trying, Nubb was able to
spoon a few tips of brandy between the lad's lips, and Oatsie fancied
she saw his muscles relax in a new way.

 She couldn't be certain of this. She was no doctor.

 Of one thing she was sure, though. With his arrival, the mood of the
Grasstrail Train changed. Why? Perhaps this: If the poor creature had
been beaten to within an inch of his life, and lived, there might be
hope for all of them. Think about it:His face hadn't been scraped .
People relaxed. The nasal buzz of prayers around the supper campfire
gave way to a quieter mood. Song returned, in time.

 We'll make it. We deserve to. The privilege of life has been accorded
us, see? We've been saved. Must be for a reason. Spines straightened,
eyes grew bright and moist in a rapture of gratitude at the plan of the
Unnamed God.

 Another week and they had rounded the landmark rocks that marked their
U-turn north, and they left behind them in the Disappointments the
greatest threat of ambush.

 In this month of Summersend, the wind flicked the strands of oakhair in
the forest that grew between the lakes. Squirrels spilled nuts on the
skarkskin roofs of the wagons. The air was more watery, too, though both
lakes were out of sight beyond the miles of woods on either side.

 As the oakhair forest thinned and they reached the Shale Shallows, the
shady surround and homely walls of an old settlement solidified in the
middle of walnut-colored fields. The first stone building they'd seen in
six weeks. Despite its steep, aggrieved gables and pinched outbuildings,
despite its battlement defenses, nothing--not even the Emerald City--could
seem more welcome a sight just then.

 "The Cloister of Saint Glinda," they buzzed. "How holy it appears."

 The maunts who lived within were divided into ranks. Some took vows of
silence and lived cloistered. Others took vows of indulgence. They
indulged in teaching, tending the sick, and operating a hostelry for
those traveling between the southern Kells and the Emerald City. So the
broad carved doors were swung open when the Grasstrail Train pulled up.
The welcoming committee, a band of three middle-aged maunts with
well-starched collars and bad teeth, stood at attention.

 They greeted Oatsie with frosty politeness. They were suspicious of any
unmarried woman who had found a way to live single, apart from female
community. Still, they offered her the traditional wipe of the face with
sweet rosefern. A fourth maunt, sequestered behind a screen, played a
welcoming anthem, poorly. Harp strings snapped, and the sound of a most
unmauntish oath issued forth.

 The travelers didn't care. They were almost in heaven. To anticipate
beds!--and a warm meal!--and wine!--and a captive audience, ready to thrill
at the story of their journey!

 In this last item, though, the maunts gave bad value for money. At once
their attention was riveted by the invalid. They carried him into the
loggia and hurried to collect a stretcher so he could be hauled upstairs
to the infirmary.

 The maunts were beginning to shift the fellow to private quarters when
the Superior Maunt wafted by, fresh from her morning devotions. She
greeted Oatsie Manglehand with the least of nods, and glanced upon the
broken lad for a moment. Then she waved her hands: Remove him.

 She said to Oatsie, "We know him. We know this one."

 "You do?" said Oatsie.

 "If my memory hasn't begun to fail me," the Superior Maunt continued,
"you should know him, as well. You took him from us some years ago.
Fifteen was it, twenty? At my age I don't apprehend the passage of time
as I ought."

 "He'd have been a child twenty years ago, an infant," said Oatsie. "I
never took an infant from a mauntery."

 "Perhaps not an infant. But you took him just the same. He traveled
with a disagreeable novice who served for several years in the hospice.
You were conveying them to the castle stronghold of the Arjikis. Kiamo Ko."

 "He was with Elphaba?"

 "Now you remember, I see you do."

 "The Wicked Witch of the West... 
 "As some called her." The Superior Maunt sniffed. "Not I. Her name here
was Sister Saint Aelphaba, but I seldom called her anything. She was
more or less under a vow of silence--her own. She needed no addressing."

 "You recognize him from youth to now?" said Oatsie. "You've seen him
since?"

 "No. But I do not forget a face."

 Oatsie raised her eyebrows.

 "I have seen so few faces," explained the Superior Maunt. "We will not
talk now. I must have Sister Doctor here to look the boy over."

 "Whatwas his name?"

 The Superior Maunt vanished without answering.

 By nightfall, as Oatsie's clients finished their nightcaps, the next
generation of rumors was launched. The man-child was the Emperor's
confessor. He was a brigand trafficking in the sex trade. He spoke in
the voice of a Loon. Except for a single rib, the man-child had broken
every bone in his body.

 Many of the rumors were contradictory, which in the aggregate made them
all more amusing.

 3

 IT WAS A HARD TIME.It had been a hard time, in Oz, for some time (for
all time, said world-weary students). The Superior Maunt, too tired for
colloquy, removed herself to her chambers and settled in a rocker. Amid
trappings more severe than what her younger colleagues could tolerate,
she rocked a little and thought, as coherently as she could. (It was a
habit of hers, to forestall the onset of vagueness, that she review a
strand of history from time to time.)

 The Witch--so-called--had lived at the cloistered mauntery a decade and a
half ago. One couldn't forgetthat--to the Superior Maunt's knowledge, no
one else in Oz had ever been born with skin as green as new lilac
leaves. But Elphaba had kept herself to herself, accepting without
complaint such assignments as were meted out. She'd lived there for,
what, five, six, seven years? And then, the Superior Maunt had hired
Oatsie Manglehand to escort the close-lipped novice back into the
civilian world. The small boy had tagged along, neither warmly included
nor shooed away.

 What had his name been, and where had he come from? An urchin left
behind by one of the gypsy bands that scavenged for petty mushrooms
among the roots of oakhair trees? The Superior Maunt couldn't remember
the lad's provenance. Someone younger would know.

 Elphaba had gone. Off to Kiamo Ko, there to stew in her own private
penance. The Superior Maunt occasionally listened to testimonies of sin
confessed by her sisters, but during her tenure as a maunt, Elphaba had
never petitioned for an audience. Of this the Superior Maunt was quite
sure. Though the nature of Elphaba's sins had been of great interest to
the under-entertained sorority, Elphaba had never obliged.

 Bit by bit--the news filtered through even to an outpost like this--the
maunts learned of the slow evolution of Elphaba into a Witch, by dint of
her rash behavior, her unexpected family ties. (She'd been sister to
Nessarose, the Wicked Witch of the East, as some said. For the love of
the Unnamed God, who could have expectedthat ?)

 The Superior Maunt sighed, chiding herself for the pleasure she took in
remembering her contempt for those days. How she had leapt up from her
prayers and clapped her hands, to hear that the long reign of the Wizard
of Oz had drawn to a close at last, and the merciless old bastard
disappeared into the clouds in a hot-air balloon advertising some
obscure commercial tonic. Then the surprise ascendancy to the Palace
throne of Lady Chuffrey, née Glinda Arduenna, of the Uplands. A sort of
prime minister pro tem, until things could be sorted out. (She'd come
out of nowhere, politically speaking: money to burn, and a certain sort
of style, but who might have guessed the vacuum left by the Wizard's
departure would suck in a society wife with a penchant for glitter gowns?)

 "Not a terrible choice." The Superior Maunt began talking aloud, to
keep her thoughts straight. "And I say this without need to reflect
nicely on our own Saint Glinda, for whom Lady Chuffrey was probably
named. Or renamed herself,Galinda a rural name,Glinda the more
sophisticated: the saint's name. Clever move." No,Glinda, as she became
known popularly--a single name, like a house pet, like a lapdog!--Glinda
managed to run an open court for a while, and much that had gone wrong,
at least in that prior atmosphere of Wizardic secrecy, was corrected.
There was an inoculation initiative, very thoughtful. Some schools for
millworker girls, of all things. Good programs--expensive to run, though.
It had seemed generous and intelligent from the perspective of a
cloistered spinster--but what kind of perspective was that?

 Then Glinda had stepped aside. Ever the dilettante, she'd grown bored
with governing, people assumed, and had taken up collecting miniature
furniture with a vengeance. Well, to be fair, maybe she'd been pushed
out. For a while a puppet government replaced her. A right dolt, calling
himself a Scarecrow. Rumors had flown that he was no real Scarecrow,
that he wasn't even the Scarecrow associated with the Visitor: Dorothy.
He was just some out-of-work bum dressed up to fool the masses. Being
paid every weekend at the back door, probably--but by whom? Glinda's
people? Her thwarters? The banker barons of industrial Gillikin? Who
knew? In due course he was booted out by the latest nuisance, the next
hollow man, reeking with glory: the sacred Emperor.

 The long years since Elphaba had driven her wild broom across the sky
had been quiet--on the surface. Certain atrocities had ceased, and that
was good. Other atrocities replaced them. Certain diseases subsided,
others had taken grip. Now something was agitating the Scrow and the
Yunamata in the West, something so fierce that agents from one or both
of the tribes were striking out at neutral parties.

 Like the junior maunts sent out on a mission by the toadies helming the
motherchapel in the Emerald City. Those sycophantic biddies! They'd
cluck themselves to death if their Emperor asked it. Their emissaries,
those innocent young things, had stopped here at the Cloister of Saint
Glinda for nourishment and cheer. Where were their faces now, wondered
the Superior Maunt. She hoped she'd never see them again, neither in her
dreams nor in a parcel in the delivery of post.

 She was drifting off to sleep in her rocker. She arose, groaning at the
pain in her joints, and tried to pull her shutters tight. One of them
stuck and had to stay as it was. She'd meant to have it seen to this
afternoon, but with the arrival of the caravan, she'd forgotten.

 She visited the toilet reserved for her private use, and dressed in her
rough gown for the night. When she settled herself on her horsehair
mattress, she hoped she would drift off quickly. It had been a taxing day.

 The jackal moon looked in her window at her. The Superior Maunt turned
her head so as not to meet its eye, a folk custom with which she'd been
raised seven, eight decades earlier, and never shaken.

 Her mind went briefly to those days in the Pertha Hills of Gillikin,
days sharper and more wonderful in memory than what she could apprehend
of current life. The taste of pearlfruit leaves! The water on her
father's wagon roof when the rains came. The rains came so much more
often in her youth. The snow smelled of things. Everything smelled.
Wonderfully or not, it was wonderful that they smelled. Now her nose
hardly worked at all.

 She said a prayer or two.

 Liir. That was his name. Liir.

 She prayed to remember it when the time came for her to wake up.

 4

 THE NEXT MORNING,before Oatsie Manglehand gathered her band together
for the final push to the Emerald City, she took Nubb to a small plain
parlor. There they met with the Superior Maunt, Sister Doctor, and
Sister Apothecaire.

 When the Superior Maunt sat down, the others sat. Since she abstained
from morning tea, the others abstained.

 "If we are to help this boy, we must share what we know," began the
Superior Maunt. "I've picked up all sorts of hearsay. A report from
Sister Doctor, if you please."

 Sister Doctor, a beefy woman with questionable credentials but proven
expertise in diagnosis, wasn't sanguine about the prospects for the
invalid. "He appears to have suffered little from exposure, so he will
have been left for dead only shortly before you found him."

 Oatsie didn't speak to this. She didn't want to begin by contradicting
a professional woman, even if she thought Sister Doctor had to be wrong.

 Sister Doctor pressed on. "He is a shattered man, quite literally. It
isn't mine to guess how he came to be so wounded, but his state is like
nothing I've ever seen. One of his legs is broken in multiple places;
both his wrists are sprained. One of his shoulder blades is cracked.
Many of his ribs. Four of his fingers. Three of the bones in his left
foot. Not a single bone punctured the skin, however. And, apparently, no
blood loss."

 Not unless the blood ran off in the rain squall, thought Oatsie, but
kept still.

 Sister Doctor rubbed the back of her neck and grimaced. "I spent so
much time setting bones that I could do only a cursory exam of his
organs. He is breathing shallowly and with difficulty. The phlegm that
runs from his nose is both yellow and bloody. This suggests respiratory
troubles. Sister Apothecaire has her own notions about this--"

 "To start with the question of the discharge," began Sister
Apothecaire, somewhat overenthusiastically, but Sister Doctor spoke over
her.

 "Sister Apothecaire can speak presently. I utter no opinion about
her... njectures."

 "The heart?" asked the Superior Maunt, overriding the old tired conflict.

 "Working." Sister Doctor grunted as if in disbelief at her own answer.

 "The guts?"

 "The word might bewobbly . I suspect an imploded spleen or the like,
and septic poisoning. There's a funny color in the extremities and on
certain contusions that I don't care for at all."

 "What color is that?" asked the Superior Maunt.

 Sister Doctor pursed her lips. "Well, I'm a bit overtired. We worked
all night, you know, without resting. But I should have said there's a
green tinge to the bruises, ringed with a plum-yellowy margin."

 "Suggestive of internal bleeding, you think...  a disease? Or maybe
something else?"

 "He may be comatose or he may be brain-dead. I have no way of knowing.
Though his heart is good, his color, as I say, is not, so circulation
may be failing. The lungs have been compromised severely--whether by a
preexisting condition or by some aspect of his adventures I cannot
venture an opinion at this time."

 "To conclude--" The Superior Maunt rolled her hand in the air.

 "Death by nightfall, maybe tomorrow morning," said Sister Doctor.

 "We could pray for a miracle," said Nubb. Oatsie snorted.

 "Sister Apothecaire will handle treatment," said Sister Doctor, making
it sound as if she thought prayer would be a wiser course.

 "Youcould pray for a miracle," said Sister Apothecaire to Nubb. "I have
other work to do."

 "Sister Apothecaire," said the Superior Maunt. "You have something to add?"

 Sister Apothecaire pushed her spectacles down her nose, then removed
them, huffed upon them, and wiped them clean on the hem of her apron.
She was a Munchkin and exhibited the Munchkin farmwife's passion for
hygiene--not a bad attribute for a person in her profession. "It's all
puzzling," she agreed. "We have made him as comfortable as we could, and
as the mercy of our mission requires. With tape we have bound his limbs
to splints and shims. Should he live, he may regain some degree of motor
function."

 "What does that mean?" asked Oatsie. "Speak clearly to the ignorant. Me."

 "He may be able to sit up, to use his hands, if his nerves are not shot
to hell. He may be able to walk, in a fashion; that is unlikely, but as
I say we aim for the stars. What is more troubling is the discharge from
his membranes. The nose, most obviously, but the other orifices as well.
Ears, eyes, anus, penis."

 "You've had a chance to do some initial work in the laboratory,"
prompted the Superior Maunt.

 "Indeed. Just a start. I've found nothing definitive, nothing I haven't
seen before, either in my station here at the mauntery or in my prior
position as Matron's Assistant at the Respite of Incurables in the
Emerald City."

 Sister Doctor rolled her eyes. Sister Apothecaire never lost an
opportunity to publish her credentials.

 "Canyou supply us with a hypothesis?" asked the Superior Maunt.

 "It would be rash to do so." Even sitting, Sister Apothecaire was
shorter than her peers, so her sideways glance at her disapproving
colleague required her to poke her chin up, which perhaps gave her a
more combative expression than she intended. "Whoever he is, I do wonder
if this lad was from high altitudes. The mucous seepage may be due to
the systemic collapse of arterial function due to a sudden change in air
pressure. I haven't seen such a symptom before, but the Fallows are very
low ground indeed compared to the highest peaks of the Great Kells."

 The way Sister Doctor murmured "mmmmm" made it plain to all what she
thought of her colleague's hypothesis. She straightened her spine as if
to say, hurry up; her longer spine gave her height over her colleague,
which she liked to use to advantage.

 The Superior Maunt intervened. "Do you agree with Sister Doctor that
death is imminent?"

 Sister Apothecaire sniffed. The two didn't like to agree on anything,
but she couldn't help it. She nodded her head. "There may be more to
learn," she added. "The longer he hangs on, the more chance I'll have to
study his nature."

 "You will study nothing in his nature that isn't directly related to
the easing of his afflictions," said the Superior Maunt mildly.

 "But Mother Maunt! It is in my charge as an apothecaire. The syndrome
he dies from may afflict others in time, and this is an opportunity to
learn. To turn our noses up at it is to discount revelation."

 "I have delivered my opinion on the matter, and I expect it to be
observed. Now, to you both: Is there anything we can do for him that we
are not doing?"

 "Notify the next of kin," said Sister Doctor.

 The Superior Maunt nodded and rubbed her eyes. She lifted a saucer of
tea to her lips now, and without hesitation the others did the same.

 "I propose we get one of the sisters to play music for him, then," she
concluded. "If our only contribution is to ease his death, let us do
what we can."

 "Preferably not the sister who was torturing the harp when we arrived
yesterday," muttered Oatsie Manglehand.

 "Have you anything to add, Oatsie?" said the Superior Maunt. "I mean
aside from your critique of musical performance?"

 "Only this," said the caravan guide. I won't bother to apologize for
contradicting them, she decided. "Sister Doctor proposes that the boy
would have been set upon by brigands and left to die only shortly before
we found him. But the terrain out there, my friends, is flat as a
rolled-out tart crust."

 "I don't follow," said the Superior Maunt.

 "The body had to have been lying there for longer than Sister Doctor
suggests. I would have seen the marauders in retreat. There was no place
for them to hide. There is no tree cover. You know how bright a night it
was; I could see for miles."

 "Puzzling indeed."

 "Do you use magic in your ministrations?"

 "Oatsie Manglehand," said the Superior Maunt tiredly, "we are a
sorority of unionist maunts. Such a question." She closed her eyes and
rubbed her forehead with old, bowed fingers. Over her venerable figure,
Sister Doctor and Sister Apothecaire both nodded silently to Oatsie:Yes.
We do. What little we're capable of. When we need to .

 The Superior Maunt continued. "Before resting for the night, I recalled
his name. The boy was named Liir. He left the mauntery with Sister Saint
Aelphaba--well, Elphaba, I suppose; she never professed her vows. Do you
remember the boy at all, Sister Doctor?"

 "I had just arrived about the time Elphaba was setting out," said
Sister Doctor. "I remember Elphaba Thropp a little. I didn't care for
her. Her moods and silences seemed hostile rather than holy. Of the many
urchins who are abandoned around here, however, I remember even less.
Children don't interest me unless they are gravely ill. Was he gravely ill?"

 "He is now," said the Superior Maunt. "And somewhere, if his mind is
still able to dream, he is still a child in there, I presume."

 "Very sentimental indeed, Mother Maunt," said Sister Doctor.

 "I do remember him, now you give his name," said Oatsie Manglehand.
"Not well, of course. In the better years I make three or four separate
runs, and we're talking twelve, fifteen, eighteen years ago? I have
packed more than a few children onto heaps of worldly goods, and buried
some by the side of the track as well. But he was a quiet lad, unsure of
himself. He shadowed Elphaba as if she were his mother. Was she his mother?"

 "Oh, dubious, very dubious," said Sister Doctor.

 "There is the green tone to his bruises," Sister Apothecaire reminded them.

 "I blush when I'm embarrassed, Sister Apothecaire; this does not relate
me to the radish," said the Superior Maunt. "Well, we'll have to ask
around. Most of the older sisters who might have remembered Elphaba are
dead now, and the others are in their second childhood. But Sister Cook,
if she hasn't been guzzling the cooking sherry--or perhaps if she has--she
will know something. She always slips food to the children loitering in
the kitchen yard, and she may remember where the boy came from.

 "Meanwhile"--and the good woman rose, to signal that the meeting was
done--"we will do our best with Liir, whether he be witch's spawn or the
reject of a gypsy mother. It hardly matters on one's deathbed from whom
one has been born, does it? The world is the womb now, and the Afterlife
waits for one to be born into it."

 She turned rheumy eyes on Oatsie Manglehand. The wagoneer could see
that the Superior Maunt was waiting, hopefully, for her own deliverance
from this world and delivery unto the next. Oatsie accepted the old
woman's cool hands on her forehead, knowing the gesture was intended as
a blessing, a forgiveness... rhaps a farewell.

 "The wind is high," said Oatsie Manglehand. "If we leave now and find
the water level low enough at the near ford, we'll make the far bank of
the Gillikin by nightfall."

 "The Unnamed God speed your progress," murmured the Superior Maunt,
though her eyes had shunted inward, as if already on to the next
problem. Indeed, she was. Before Oatsie had finished tying the strings
of her boots, she heard the Superior Maunt say to her colleagues, "Now
you must help me on the stairs, ladies, for I will go to visit our invalid."

 "She's a tough old bird," muttered Oatsie to Nubb.

 "Let's get out of here," said Nubb. "Don't want to stay under any roofs
that house a son of a witch, even if it's holy roofs."

 5

 THE MAUNTERY,the oldest bits of which dated back several hundred years,
was conventionally arranged around a courtyard. The vernacular of
austere Merthic style--flattened stone columns, bricked quoins devoid of
plaster or wash--was indicative of the speed with which defensible
households had needed to be raised.

 Up far too many stairs, the surgery included an office crammed into a
closet, where Sister Doctor kept her notes and manuals. In a storage
space under some eaves, Sister Apothecaire filled oaken cabinets with
her unguents and restoratives, purgatives and negatives. (Small, as many
Munchkins still were, she could work upright in a space too cramped for
her colleague to stand upright in, so she got the private office.
Endless grousing over this.)

 The surgery also gave onto two largish dormitories. The right-hand
chamber served the poor and ill of the domain. The left chamber was
reserved for ailing maunts. Through here, behind a stout door, loomed an
odd-shaped space, the finial of a corner tower. Inside, therefore, it
was a round room, with narrow slitted windows looking in three
directions. The room had no true walls or ceiling, just sloping rafters
that met at the top of the conical space. A bedbound patient could stare
up and see how the roof planking traversed the ribs. There were bats,
but they were cleaner than most of the patients, so they were let be.

 It's like nothing so much as being inside a witch's hat, thought the
Superior Maunt as she paused to catch her breath. Then she pushed aside
the curtain and entered.

 Liir--if it was he, and she was rather certain it was--was laid upon the
high bed more like a corpse than an invalid. "He's been given no
pillow?" asked the Superior Maunt in something of a whisper.

 "The neck."

 "I see." Well, there wasn't much to see, really. His braced limbs were
swathed in wide strips of gauze, his chest bound, his head undressed,
and that dark hair cleaned with oil and herbs. His eyes, behind slits in
the bandage, were closed. The lashes were long and feathery. "He has not
been torrefied, has he? You have tucked him up like a victim of burns."

 "The skin needs tending for the sores, so we cannot fully immobilize him."

 I suspect not, thought the Superior Maunt.

 Her eyes weren't what they had been. She leaned forward and looked
closely at the seams where Liir's upper and lower eyelids met.

 Then she lifted his left hand and studied his nails. His skin was
clammy, like the rind of a valley-skark cheese. The fingernails were crazed.

 "Pull back his loincloth."

 Sister Doctor and Sister Apothecaire exchanged glances and did as they
were bade.

 The Superior Maunt had had little reason to become an expert in the
male anatomy, but she showed no sign of pleasure or revulsion. She
gently shifted the member this way and that, and lifted the testicles.
"I ought to have brought my reading spectacles," she murmured.

 She needed help straightening up. "Very well, do him up again," she
said. Her maunts obliged.

 "Sister Doctor," said the Superior Maunt. "Sister Apothecaire. I will
not have you loosen his bindings to show me the bruises you report. I
rely on your perspicacity. However I make note here, and will do so
formally in the Log of the House, that I observe no sign of greenness in
his skin. I will tolerate no murmur belowstairs that we are harboring
any sort of--aberration. If you have been indiscreet enough to propose
such to your sisters, correct the damage at once. Is this understood?"

 She didn't wait for an answer, and turned back to the body.

 It was hard to take the measure of a man who displayed the flaccid
composure of a corpse. No brow is noble when it is dead: It has no need
to be. This lad seemed about as close to death as one could be and still
harbor hope of recovery, yet the sense she had about him was neither
tranquil nor restive.

 He was a young man, with youth's agreeable form: That much was apparent
despite the bandages. The young suffer and die, too, and sometimes it is
merciful, she thought. Then she was filled with an unseemly glee and
selfishness that she had lived a long odd life of her own, and it wasn't
over yet. She was in better shape than this poor benighted kid.

 "Mother Maunt, are you yourself?" asked Sister Doctor.

 "A tremor of digestive grief, nothing more."

 She couldn't put her finger on it. She turned to go. There was Sister
Cook to interview next, and other pressing matters of the day. As Sister
Apothecaire fussed with the bedclothes and Sister Doctor dived to
confirm the pulse, the Superior Maunt sighed. "We will do our duty, and
no more than our duty," she reminded them.

 They stood to attention. "Yes, Mother Maunt."

 Neither tranquil nor restive, she thought again: It is as if his spirit
is not here. His body is not dead, but his spirit is not here. How can
this be?

 Blasphemy, and bad science besides, she lectured herself, and scooted
away as fast as her arthritic limbs could manage.

 6

 THESUPERIORMAUNThad long since given up supervising Sister Cook. For
one thing, the ancient maunt had little interest in cuisine, her stomach
having been soured by too many decades of regrettable food served under
bad kitchen government. Those appetites remaining to her, after all
these decades, concerned feeding the spirit alone.

 So, pausing at the thresholds of the mauntery's kitchens, the Superior
Maunt felt a faint queasiness.

 Given where the mauntery was situated--on the back route from Quadling
Country--the establishment took in its share of Quadling girls deemed too
plain or unruly for marriage, or too dull for the mild
professions--teacher, governess, nurse. Sometimes their families
reclaimed them. More often, the girls ran away, but at least they were
older and better fed when they struck out on their own.

 Still, while in residence, they were as a population docile enough, and
they made good kitchen assistants. Looking for Sister Cook, it occurred
to the Superior Maunt that a Quadling girl might sit with the
convalescent upstairs.

 "Sister Cook?" called the Superior Maunt, but her voice was rusty.
"Sister Cook?"

 There was no reply. Into the kitchens ventured the Superior Maunt. A
few quiet girls worked in a sunny corner, kneading vast tough pillows of
bread dough with their bare knees. The peasant practice was generally
frowned upon, but the Superior Maunt passed by the novices, pretending
not to notice, as she didn't feel up to delivering a chastisement.

 Sister Liquor was high on a ladder, giving each purple glass bottle of
savorsuckle brandy a quarter turn. She was singing to herself and
swaying on her rung.

 "Mercy," murmured the Superior Maunt, and kept going.

 The pantry offended with the promise of lunch: bread, moldiflower root,
rounds of aged skark cheese, and soft blue olives, the kind even donkeys
refused to eat. It's notthat hard to keep your mind on higher things
when this is the daily fare, observed the Superior Maunt.

 The outside door was open. Beyond the pantry, in the walled orchard,
wands of pearlfruit trees twitched and shuddered in the wind. The
Superior Maunt went through, as much to catch a breath of fresh air as
to see the severe autumn colors of pearlfruit leaves, which shaded from
granite pink to a hesitant periwinkle.

 In the emerald grass near the well several novices sat on their aprons.
They'd taken for a little outing one of the palsied biddies in a wheeled
chair and kindly thrown a tartan over her lap. The ancient maunt--older
even than the Superior Maunt, by the look of it, or more infirm,
anyway--had pulled her shawl over her forehead, to keep the morning sun
out of her eyes. Two of the novices were husking pearlfruit pods. A
third was fingering some sort of instrument, a kind of zither or
dulcimer with lengths of catgut strung along two axes, one set
perpendicularly above the other. The effect of her plucking and
slithering was more tympanic than melodic. Perhaps the thing was out of
tune. Or the player untalented. Or even that it was a foreign way of
making music. Still, the other novices seemed not to mind, indeed, even
to take pleasure from the droning sounds.

 They leaped to their feet at her approach, scattering their work in the
grass. They were Quadlings, the younger three of them. "Girls, please,"
said the Superior Maunt. "To your tasks." Then, deferentially, "Your
health, Mother."

 The older maunt nodded but didn't look up. Her eyes were on the fingers
of the girl playing.

 "I was hoping to find Sister Cook," said the Superior Maunt.

 "She's in the mushroom cellar, harvesting for a fungal soup. Shall I
fetch her?" asked one of them.

 "No," said the Superior Maunt, looking one to the other. "Are you all
first-years?"

 "Shhhh," said the crone.

 The Superior Maunt did not like being shhh'd. "Are you professed, the
lot of you?"

 "Shhhh, he's coming."

 "Mother, I have work--" said the Superior Maunt. The sister in the chair
raised her wrinkled hand. She had no fingerprints, no lifelines on her
right hand--no identity, no history, nothing to read, as if her hand had
been burned clean of individuality through some chastening flame.

 Only one old biddy had this hand. "What are you on about, Mother
Yackle?" asked the Superior Maunt.

 The old creature didn't answer, didn't look up, but she did crook one
hobbled finger skyward. The Superior Maunt turned. All kinds of romance
and lore about visitors from the sky, from sacred scripture to
rabble-rousing prophecies. The sky was hard to ignore.

 It wasn't the sky, though, that Mother Yackle was indicating, but one
of the trees. Out of it fell a ruffling cascade, like a stack of ladies'
fans sliding silkily off a credenza. A scatter of brazen feathers, red
winking. A gold eye set in a pear-shaped skull.

 A crimson pfenix! Male, to judge by the plumage. The species was
rumored to have been nearly hunted to extinction. The last known
colonies of pfenix lived in the very south of Oz, where the watery acres
of marsh began at last to dry out, and a strip of jungle thought to be
seven miles wide still defeated travelers to this day. This fellow--blown
off course, perhaps, or deranged by disease?

 The pfenix landed on the center of the musical instrument that the
third girl was playing. She looked up in some alarm; she hadn't been
attending anything but her music. The pfenix craned his head and fixed
first one, then another golden eye on the Superior Maunt.

 "If you're looking for the talented one," said the pfenix--well, the
Pfenix, if he spoke--"this is the one for you. I've been watching for an
hour, and she takes little notice of anything but her music."

 The women said nothing. Talking Birds were not uncommon, but they
rarely bothered to speak to human beings. What a specimen this Pfenix
was! His rack of tail feathers fanned out laterally, like a turkey's,
but a Pfenix just as easily could unfurl his close-coiled camouflage
feathers, which spiked globally all about him, affording a sort of
private chamber of airy, concealing, fernlike fronds. A mature male
Pfenix aloft in full display could look like a shimmering globe in the air.

 "Do you know the boy who has been brought here?" asked the Superior
Maunt, beginning to govern her own awe.

 "I don't know any boys. I don't consort with your kind at all. I am a
Red Pfenix," he added, as if they might not have taken it in.

 The Superior Maunt disapproved of vainglory in all its forms. She
turned to the musician. "What's your name?"

 The girl looked up but didn't answer. Her face was not as ruddy as some
Quadlings--less red, more umber. Its shape was pleasing, proportioned
along the lines of an oakhair nut: broad brow, high cheekbones, sweet
swollen cheeks like a toddler's, a small but firm chin. The Superior
Maunt, who did not pay much attention to the looks of her novices, was
surprised.

 She was too beautiful to be a natural maunt, so she must be a moron.

 "She doesn't speak much," said one of the novices.

 "She's been here three weeks," added the other. "Her whispered prayers
are in a dialect we can't decipher. We think she cannot raise her voice."

 "The Unnamed God hears anyway. Where do you come from, child?"

 "Sister Cook will know," said the first novice.

 "Up, girl, up," said the Superior Maunt. "You have been chosen by a Red
Pfenix. You don't talk much, but you understand our tongue? Just the one
I need." She offered her hand to the musician, who rose, reluctantly.
The Red Pfenix nestled in the grass and set to ridding himself of lice.

 "Can I send for a bowl of scented water, something? Is there a way we
can offer charity to you?" said the Superior Maunt. "We don't have
visits from the likes of you often. In fact, I think never."

 "I'm only passing through," said the Red Pfenix. "There's a Conference
farther west. But the music drew me down."

 "You love music?"

 "If I loved music I wouldn't have stopped. She doesn't play very well,
does she? No, I don't love music; it interferes with my homing devices.
I was merely curious to see an instrument like this again. The sound of
her playing reminded me of a time I had seen one long ago; I'd quite
forgotten. But thank you for your charity. I require nothing but a
little rest."

 The Red Pfenix looked at the musician, who stood shyly in her pale grey
novice's skirts. "She's a puzzle, that one is," said the Red Pfenix.

 "Got him!" shouted Sister Cook, coming up from behind with a snare, and
indeed she had. The Red Pfenix squawked and thrashed; all the eyes in
his plumage contorted. The scream was horrible. "Pfenix steaks!" said
Sister Cook. "I have just the recipe!"

 "Let him go," said Mother Yackle.

 It was not her place to speak next, and the Superior Maunt was
irritated. She knew Sister Cook was thinking: Pfenix steaks! With knobs
of butter, and tarragon mustard, and small new potatoes roasted in the
same pan...  "Let him go," said the Superior Maunt, more sternly than Mother Yackle.

 "Shoot," said Sister Cook. "I spend fifteen minutes creeping up on this
bird, and with my lumbago I actually manage to catch it, and you say
‘Let him go'?"

 "Do not question my authority."

 "I merely question your sense," said Sister Cook heavily. She turned
the snare over, and the Red Pfenix exploded away from the orchard, cursing.

 "He was on his way to a Conference," said Mother Yackle.

 "Enough," said the Superior Maunt. "Enough of this. Sister Cook, who is
this novice? Where did she come from?"

 Sister Cook was grinding her teeth in annoyance at the missed
opportunity. "Candle," she muttered. "Left here by a gypsy cousin for
safekeeping, said he'd be back in a year. Either she'd be mauntified by
then or he'd reclaim her, but I said I'd take her on. She causes no
trouble because she can't gossip with the other girls, and she knows how
to make a mean marrow gravy. I've had her working with Sister Sauce on
the feast day roast."

 "Can you spare her?"

 "Can I spare a Red Pfenix is a better question, and the answer to that
one isno ."

 "We don't eat Animals," said the Superior Maunt. "I know times have
changed, but it's in our charter. We don't eat anything that can talk
back to us, Sister Cook, and if I find you have been butchering behind
my back... 
 "I can hardly spare her," said Sister Cook, looking at the musician.
"But if you make her take that unnerving domingon with her, I'll call it
even."

 "Domingon, is that what it is. I'd read of them, but never seen one.
Come, my daughter, domingon and all." The Superior Maunt gestured, with
as tender a smile as her crabbed old mouth could assume. The girl rose.
She took the Superior Maunt's hand in an easy, unaffected way--the other
girls snickered. Yes, she must be simple.

 "I had come looking to ask you what you remembered of a novice we once
housed--the strange green girl, Elphaba."

 "Before my time," snapped Sister Cook, and left.

 Mother Yackle scratched her nose and yawned.

 The Red Pfenix was still screaming in the sky. He circled the towers of
the mauntery, safe now, and recovering the ability to be affronted. He
was like a clot of blood swimming above the infirmary.

 "Did you say there's a boy in the house?" asked Mother Yackle. She let
her shawl slip back, and raised her bleary, milk-clotted eyes toward the
Superior Maunt. "Did he bring back the broom?"

 7

 THESUPERIORMAUNTwas going to need a long rest after lunch, she knew:
all these stairs. A certain penance regarding the joints. But she
exerted herself, and Candle lent a willing arm without being asked,
which was a good sign that the girl wasn't hopelessly slow.

 The sun was high enough overhead by now that the room had grown warmer
and begun to sink into noon shadow. The young man lay as he had lain,
twitchless, blanketed with an unnatural calm. Sister Apothecaire and
Sister Doctor had brought their small chores close, so they could be
nearby while they worked--Sister Apothecaire, the grinding of herbs in a
mortar, and Sister Doctor the annotating of symptoms in a ledger. Sister
Doctor sat on one side of the bed, Sister Apothecaire on the other.

 "You know this novice?" said the Superior Maunt.

 Her colleagues neither admitted familiarity, nor dissented.

 "She's a garden girl with an instrument called a domingon. I have heard
of these but never see one. Apparently Candle has a small talent at
music. Perhaps in the long hours on watch over Liir, she will develop
it. Candle, meet Sister Doctor and Sister Apothecaire. You will have
seen them at table or in chapel if not elsewhere."

 It was not the professional maunts' obligation to bow, but when Candle
did not bow either, Sister Apothecaire, out of social anxiety, gave a
lurching sort of bob that might have meant any number of things.

 To the older women the Superior Maunt said, "There are matters more
pressing for you to attend to than the continual observation of our new
guest. I have a different assignment for you."

 "Mother Maunt!" replied Sister Doctor. "Far be it from me to question
your discernment. But I must remind you, in loyal obeisance of course,
that while you govern the spirit of this House, I supervise the health
of the individual souls within it."

 "As to such treatments that may be required," began Sister Apothecaire,
but the Superior Maunt held up her hand.

 "I will hear no objection. Candle seems a simple soul, but she can sit
here and watch the boy. She understands my instructions. If he so much
as speaks, she will let someone know. She can practice her scales and
perhaps grow in skill. If he is to die, let him be comforted by the
peculiar drone of her instrument. This is my wish, and I have made my
point."

 She cupped her hands before her in an archaic, formal gesture that
meant "be it thus" or, depending on the expression of the speaker,
"enough out of you, you."

 Nevertheless, Sister Apothecaire protested. "I'm well aware of this
girl, she doesn't know enough to come in out of the rain. You are making
a terrible mistake--"

 "In this rare instance Sister Apothecaire is correct," said Sister
Doctor. "Should any wound suppurate, or a complication develop--"

 "I have other jobs for you two," said the Superior Maunt. "Your
insistence at brooking my will convinces me. You two are the ones for
the next job at hand."

 They paused in their flailing, affronted and curious.

 "I haven't yet told you what I recently learned about the three
missionary novices from the Emerald City who stopped here some days
ago," said the Superior Maunt. "Their small party was ambushed and they
were all killed. Scraped, I'm afraid. Someone will need to find out who
did the deed, and why."

 She turned. "Finish your nostrums and reinforce your binding spells at
once, enough to last till dinner anyway, and come with me. I shall nap
briefly instead of taking a meal, and we will convene in my sectorium
when the lunch prayers are concluded."

 She was untrained in their profession. How did she know they'd used
several illicit binding spells? This was why she was the Superior Maunt,
they guessed. She didn't know medicine but she knew women.

 There was nothing for them to do but obey. Walking slightly in advance
of them, the Superior Maunt couldn't help but smile faintly to herself.
The medical womenwere good, solid folk. They were merely curious,
curious as hell, like the rest of the House. And whatever was troubling
Liir, inside or out, he would recover or decline more comfortably
without being smothered by the attentions of middle-aged maunts.

 The Superior Maunt paused to catch her breath. Stairs were the devil.
Her two colleagues respectfully froze in place while she wheezed. The
willpower of women, she thought. These two, and me besides. I make the
awful choice to put them in danger. If anyone can manage the task at
hand, they will. Keep them safe, she prayed.

 But why do I even have to put my dear sisters in jeopardy? Because my
colleagues in the motherchapel dare to send young innocent missionaries
into the wild--without so much as a guide. No Oatsie Manglehand for
them--just faith, innocence, and courage born of stupidity. Damn the
Emerald City for leaning down upon us all. Damn those--thosebath mats in
the motherhouse, for yielding to the influence of the government!

 She didn't utter a private apology for the oath. She felt she'd earned
the right to swear internally, now and then. When it was warranted.

 8

 CANDLE HARDLY GLANCEDat Liir. She sat on a rush-seated chair and rubbed
the calloused pads of her right fingers over the upper strings. A faint
harmonic vibration buzzed in the lower strings, almost inaudible--a
sensation in the air more than a sound.

 The light heaved in its uncertain tides, as clouds too thin to see
washed across the sky. The room chilled slightly.

 Candle let her fingers wander up the frets. She was a skilled musician,
more skilled even than the kitchen sisters knew--skilled, and talented
besides. This domingon was missing a vital part, and couldn't peal or
chide or keen as she would like to require of it. Still, to keep her
fingers alert, from the domingon's double necks Candle drew dull
incomplete sentences. They had no power to comfort; this she knew. But
she would tease the lengthy imponderable sounds out into the air anyway.
She had seen the Red Pfenix in the sky. So it was her playing that had
called him down, was it? She could do it again, and more besides.

_ Abroad_

 1

 THE DOMINGON PLAYED ON. Unheard by Liir in his state, it had its effect
nonetheless.

 

 HE WAS LIVING IN THE CASTLE called Kiamo Ko at the time, but he wasn't
present at the death of the Witch.

 The Witch had locked him in the kitchen with Nanny and that jittery
Lion. Showing surprising resourcefulness for one so dotty, Nanny had
driven the handle of a one-egg iron skillet into the rotten wood of the
doorjamb. Getting the idea, Liir and the Lion gouged at the hinges until
the door fell heavily inward.

 Chistery, the Witch's Snow Monkey, had skittered ahead of them up the
stairs to the Witch's tower-top chambers. But Dorothy was already coming
down, her face glutinous with tears, the badly burned broom stinking in
her hands. "She's gone," sobbed the girl, and Liir's heart had gone out
to her--whose wouldn't? He'd sat on the step and snaked his arm around
her shoulders. He was fourteen. First attraction is awkward under any
circumstances, he supposed, but this was extreme. It wasn't as if he'd
ever seen people being tender. And she was a saint from the Other Land,
for pity's sake.

 The girl couldn't control her shock, so it took Liir a while to
understand what she was blubbering about. The Witch wasgone . His
earliest memory, his bête noire, his Auntie, his jail-keeper, his sage
friend--his mother, the others had said, but there'd been no proof of
that, and she'd never answered the question when he'd asked her.

 Dead, dead and gone, and after her own inspection, Nanny wouldn't let
him up to the parapet to see. "The sight would turn the holy blind," she
murmured, "so it's a good thing I'm an old sinner. And you, you're just
a young fool. Forget it, Liir." She pocketed the key and began to warble
in an unfamiliar mode, some dirge from her backwater childhood. "Sweet
Lurlina, mother of mercy, shroud of the murdered, shawl of the missing... 
 Nanny's pagan pieties were somehow unconvincing. But on what basis
could he say that? He'd left the unionist mauntery too young to absorb
any of the tenets of faith that supported the cloistered way of life.
From the distance of a skeptical adolescent, unionism seemed like a
thicket of contradictions. Charity to all, but intolerance toward the
heathen. Poverty ennobles, but the Bishops had to be richer than
everyone else. The Unnamed God made the good world, imprisoning the
rebellious human being within it, and taunting humankind with tinderbox
sexuality that must be guarded against at all costs.

 Lurlinism was no more sensible, to judge by how Nanny spoke of it.
Random episodes of mildly erotic dalliance, as Lurlina effectively wooed
Oz into being. Privately he thought it was downright stupid, though,
being prettier, it was also easier to remember.

 Perhaps he just didn't have the feeling for faith. It seemed to be a
kind of language, one whose gnarled syntax needed to be heard from
birth, or it remained forever unintelligible. But he wished he had a
faith now, some scrap of something: for Elphaba was dead, and to act as
if the world were no more changed than if some branch of a tree had
snapped off--well, it didn't seem right.

 She whipped up in his mind, the first brutal memory as sudden and
insistent as a bee sting. She was yelling at him. "The Wizard's soldiers
kidnapped the whole family and left you behind? Because you were
useless? And you followed after them anyway, and theystill managed to
elude you?Are you useless?" Even then he had known she was less angry at
him than frightened at what had befallen the other residents of the
castle while she was away. Even then he had known she was relieved he'd
been spared by virtue of being insignificant. Even then he'd smarted at
the rebuke of the term. Useless.

 "I'll take the broom," said Liir at last. "She can be buried with it."

 "I need it, to prove she's dead," said Dorothy. "What else would do?"

 "I'll carry it for you then," he said.

 "You're coming with me?"

 He looked around. The courtyard of the castle was more silent than he'd
ever seen it. The Witch's crows were dead, her wolves, her bees. The
winged monkeys were huddled on top of the woodshed, paralyzed with
grief. With the Arjiki villagers in the settlement of Red Windmill down
the slope, or scattered in cottages on the leeward side of the mountain,
Liir had had little contact.

 So there was nothing to keep him in Kiamo Ko but Nanny. And old as she
was, she would soon lapse into her usual fog of deafness and
abstraction. In a week she would forget that the Witch had died.
Besides, even in her best days she'd never known where Liir had come
from. Neither had she seemed to care. So it was no hardship to leave her.

 "I'm coming with you," he said. "Yes. And I'll carry the broom."

 It was too late to leave now, so they busied themselves instead. Liir
fed the monkeys. Dorothy tried to make a meal for Nanny, who wept and
said she wasn't hungry and then ate all her portion and the Lion's besides.

 After washing up, Dorothy settled cozily in the crook of the Lion's
neck, as much to calm him as to take comfort herself. Liir climbed to
the Witch's room and looked about. Already it was as if she had never
lived there.

 He thought of the Grimmerie, that perplexing book of magic. He had
never been able to read it. Wherever the Witch had put it last, he let
it be. No matter. No Flying Monkey would be able to gibber a spell out
of it, and Nanny's eyesight was too poor to decipher its odd scrambling
text. It would be too heavy to carry, anyway.

 Books have their own life, he thought. Let it take care of itself.

 Turning to leave, he caught sight of Elphaba's black cape. A bit worse
for wear, its hems threadbare, its collar much sampled by moths. Still,
it was thick, and the days would only get colder. He put it over his
narrow shoulders. It was far too large for him, so he looped the ends
around his forearms. He looked, he supposed, like a small silly bat with
an oversize wingspan. He didn't care.

 The horizon was frosted with a greenish smear, as if ranks of campfires
from distant tribes had divined the news already and were burning an
homage to Elphaba before the sun could set on the day of her death.

 He could smell her in the collar of the cape, and he wept for the first
time.

 

 LIIR DIDN'T BOTHERto say good-bye to Chistery. Let the Witch's most
beloved Flying Monkey take care of himself now. Why else had she taught
him language, but so that he could keen when she was gone?

 On the road, the Lion and that little yapper, Toto, lagged behind with
the other two who had been waiting for Dorothy--the Scarecrow, the man of
tin--both of whom gave Liir a serious case of the creeps. The wind was
brutal and the streaky clouds massed to the east, and if Liir wasn't
mistaken, before long rain would fall.

 Dorothy asked perfunctory questions, but she was more interested in
making sure they didn't lose their way. How wouldhe know if they went
off course, he asked her--it had been seven or eight years since he'd
come from the mauntery with Elphaba, and he'd never left the
neighborhood of Kiamo Ko in all the time since. Dorothy had much more
recent experience of the greater landscape.

 "Yes, well, those Flying Monkeys carried me the last bit," she said
nervously, "and I can't claim to have had my wits about me enough to
have taken note of landmarks. Still, we're going downslope, and that's
got to be right."

 "Everything is downslope of Kiamo Ko," Liir told her.

 "I like your confidence," she said. "Tell me about yourself, then."

 He suspected his memories of young childhood were like anyone else's:
imprecise, suggestible, and largely devoid of emotion. He didn't recall
defining moments--maybe there weren't any--but he did remember the
sensation of things. The shafts of light slanting through the mullioned
windows high up in the gallery, pinning silent maunts to their silent
shadows on the stone floor. The smell of asparagus cream soup, a little
maple syrup drizzled on top. The smell of snow in the air. Liir had been
attached to Elphaba, somehow, he remembered that: he'd been allowed to
play with his broken wooden ducky in the same room where she sat and
spun wool.

 "Was she your mother?" asked Dorothy. "I'm terribly sorry to have
killed her if she was. I mean I'm sorry anyway, but more so if you were
related."

 The girl's directness was puzzling, and Liir wasn't used to it. The
Witch had never hidden her emotions, but nor had she explained them, and
in many ways living with her had been like sharing an apartment with an
ill-tempered house pet.

 He tried to be honest, but there was so much he didn't know. "I started
out with her," he said. "How, as a toddler, I came to be among the
maunts, I can't say. No one has ever told me, and the Witch wouldn't
talk about it. I remember other women from those times, Sister Cupboard
and Sister Orchard, and some of the more playful ones, the novices, who
kept their own names, Sister Saint Grayce, and Sister Linnet. But when
it came time for Elphaba to leave, they wrapped up my small packet of
clothes, too, and I was lifted up to a seat on a wagon, and we joined a
party that went through the Kells, stopping here and there until we got
to Kiamo Ko."

 "It's awfully out of the way," said Dorothy, looking around at the
unpeopled slopes of pine and potterpine, and the slides of scree, and
the scraggles of mountain lavender going to seed.

 "She wanted to be out of the way. And besides, it's where Fiyero had
lived."

 "Your father?"

 Liir was as doubtful of his paternity as he was of his maternity. "He
had meant something to her, to the Witch," he pointed out. "But what, I
don't know. I never met him. Can you imagine the Witch would sit down
and pour out her heart to me?"

 "I can't imagine anything about her. Who could?"

 He didn't want to talk anymore. The death was too recent, the shock of
it was beginning to wear off, and what began to show through was anger.
"In a general sense, we're going southwest, and then we'll cut east
through Kumbricia's Pass," he said. "I've learned that much by listening
to Oatsie Manglehand when she comes through guiding a party. There are
tribes around and about."

 "We saw no one," said Dorothy, "not for miles."

 "They saw you," said Liir. "They had to. That's what they do."

 "Not nice, to be spying on us. We're very chummy," she said, putting on
an aggressively friendly face. Any party of scouts witnessing it would
do well to keep themselves hidden.

 Before long the rain came, and he was glad, for it stopped their
conversation, which had turned into prattle. A heavy rain, the drops
like pebbles. He could see no shepherd's hut out here, not even a clump
of mountain arbor to shelter beneath. So rather than sit in the mud and
let the rain wick through their undergarments, they trudged on.

 Their confidence about their course ebbed, though, what with the
shrouding of hilltops--all landmarks wiped out of view.

 "Liir, I have no confidence in your sense of direction," said the Tin
Woodman, politely.

 "Nick Chopper! You're heartless!" said Dorothy.

 "Ha bloody ha. And you're an orphan," he replied. "I'll rust in this
downpour. Does anyone think of that? No."

 "Don't carp. I don't deal well with conflict," said the Lion. "Let's
sing a song."

 "No,"they all chorused.

 "What'll you do when you find yourself courageous--assuming the Wizard
grants you what you wish?" asked the Scarecrow, to change the subject.

 "Invest in the market? Join a troupe of music hall buskers? How the
hell do I know?" said the Lion. "Strike out on my own, anyway, and find
a better class of associates. More simpatico."

 "You?" asked the Scarecrow of the Tin Woodman.

 "What will I do if I find myself with a heart?" scoffed the Tin
Woodman. "Lose it constantly, I imagine."

 They slopped on. Liir didn't think it was his place to continue the
conversation, since he hadn't been present at their initial audience
with the Wizard. When no one else spoke, though, he said, "Well,
Scarecrow, your turn. What'll you do with your brains?"

 "I'm thinking about it," he answered, and would not discuss it further.

 "Oh, Toto!" shrieked Dorothy suddenly. "Where's Toto?"

 "He's wandered off to do his business," said the Lion. "Just between
you and me, it's about time he learned to be private about it. I know
you dote on him, but there is a limit."

 "He'll be lost," she cried. "He couldn't find his way out of a cracker
barrel. He's not very bright, you know."

 After a respectful pause, the Tin Woodman observed, "Ithink we've all
noticed that."

 "I hate to be obvious," added the Scarecrow, "but you'd have saved
yourself a heap of trouble if you weren't too cheap to invest in a
leash, Dorothy."

 "There he is," she cried, pitching up a small slope.

 The clueless creature was finishing his evacuation at the base of what
looked like an ancient traveler's shrine to Lurline. A weathered statue
of the pagan goddess gazed blindly out into the storm. The statue was
life-size, if you accepted that goddesses have the same stature as
humans. Little more than a lean-to for protecting the statue from the
elements, the structure could afford no room for the travelers to crawl
in out of the downpour. After a while, though, Liir thought of standing
on the shoulders of the Lion and slinging the big black cape out over
the shrine's roof. Using the scorched remains of the Witch's broom as a
pole, he rigged up a black tent under which they could huddle. The
Lion's mane reeked, but at least the travelers were protected from the
worst of the rain.

 "This cape is larger than it looks," said Dorothy. "And the water isn't
soaking through."

 "Maybe she hexed it waterproof. She didn't like water," said Liir.

 "So I've learned," said Dorothy.

 "Who does?" added the Tin Woodman, squeaking his joints.

 "Tell me more about her," continued Dorothy.

 Liir didn't oblige. He found Dorothy congenial enough--but it had been
so long since he'd had anything like friends his own age! At Kiamo Ko,
when he'd first arrived with Elphaba, Fiyero's three children had
allowed him into their small society, but slackly, without much
interest. The girl, Nor, had been the only one ever really to play with
him. Though he had been little more to Nor than that dog was to Dorothy,
a presence to boss around, Norhad been kind. That first Lurlinemas,
she'd given him the tail of her gingerbread mouse, because no one had
thought to make him a gingerbread mouse of his own.

 And besides her? No one else to play with, once she and Irji and the
rest of the ruling family--Fiyero's survivors--had been kidnapped by the
Wizard's forces garrisoned at Red Windmill. Yes, he'd bravely followed,
but fecklessly. They'd given him the slip. He had had to return to Kiamo
Ko and face the screeching. Then the Witch had prohibited Liir from
fraternizing any longer with Commander Cherrystone of the Gale Forcers
or from making new friends among the lice-ridden urchins of Red Windmill.

 So Liir had lived a lonely life. It could have been worse; he was fed
and he was clothed more or less warmly. He had his chores, and the
winged monkeys, largely inarticulate, at least didn't go out of their
way to move if he sat down nearby. Was there supposed to be more to a
childhood? Rehearsing it to tell Dorothy, it seemed a spare, botched
thing, and he suppressed most of it.

 Of late, the Witch had become more irritable than usual, complaining of
sleeping problems. Nanny--her nanny, at one point, and her mother's nanny
before that--was well into her eighties and good for little by way of
coherent discussion. Liir had been left to talk to himself, and he'd
found himself less than stimulating as a conversationalist.

 Dorothy's curiosity seemed flat to him, though, perhaps artificial. He
wasn't able to tell if she was really curious about his life, about the
Witch, or if she was just marking time. Maybe steeling her own nerve by
hearing the sound of her voice. He felt leery. Perhaps, the son of the
Witch or no, he had inherited from exposure to Elphaba a mild sense of
paranoia, as if everyone were after some scrap of vital information that
they were unwilling to ask for directly.

 He fussed and rolled his eyes and tried to imagine how to change the
subject. He didn't want to talk about his toddler days in the mauntery
or his boyhood in Kiamo Ko. He was bereft of family, now, something of a
hanger-on to Dorothy's party, something of a guide without a clue out
here in the cruel terrain. He just wanted to concentrate on the job.

 He was glad, therefore, when the Lion started and said, "What's that?"

 "It's night coming on," said the Tin Woodman.

 "Night coming on makes a sound like the Crack of Doom?" complained the
Lion. "Never did before. Shhh, everyone. It wasn't thunder. What was it?
Shhh, I tell you."

 The Tin Woodman observed, "You're the only one who's talking--"

 "Shhh,I said!"

 They shhhushed.

 The downpour made a symphony. An undertone of susurrus--rain at
mid-distance--accompanied the solo vocalists rounding vowels of
rainwater--plopp--plopp--or, as Liir thought, of Auntie Witch, Elphaba
Thropp--Thropp--Thropp.

 "Did you ever notice how rain sounds like a domingon?" asked the Scarecrow.

 The Lion put his paw to his mouth: Shhhh. His grimace was anything but
fearsome; he looked like an overgrown child in lion pajamas.

 Then they heard what he was hearing, and before they could do anything
about it, a stone at the base of the statue of Lurlina was shifted to
one side. Up from the earth poked the paw of a creature. A badger, a
beaver? Something brown, whiskered, and sensible. A slope grite of some
sort, larger than its valley cousin.

 "You've some nerve, besmirching the memory of Lurlina with your
prattle," said the Mountain Grite. His jowls made a saddlebag flapping
noise as he spoke.

 "Nerve," said the Lion. "I wish."

 "We're merely sheltering from the storm," said Dorothy. "May we have
your blessing to stay here?"

 The Grite bared an impressive collection of incisors and canines.

 "What business is it of yours?" said Liir. "We're not bothering you."

 The Grite looked around, as if assessing whether he might take them on
all at once and get the better of them. Apparently not. "My digs, if you
want to call it that," he said at last, "are directly below. You're a
big heavy lot, and you're going to collapse the walls of my lodging."

 "A bad place to build," said the Tin Man, for whom the teeth of a
Mountain Grite weren't much of a threat. "An insult to Lurlina, actually."

 "Maybe, but I dig deep, and if the whole thing gives and you tumble in,
you'll starve to death down there. And the stink of your rotting corpses
won't appeal to the spirit of Lurlina, however beloved of the natural
world she is said to be."

 "The storm can't last forever," said Dorothy.

 The Grite came forward a little. "Quite possibly I have rabies, you
know. Fair warning. I bite first and I don't ask questions."

 The Lion sighed and removed himself from the makeshift tent. Out there,
the deluge sloped on him like a fountain coursing over a sculptured lion.

 "We're not going to let some overgrown rodent chase us into the storm,"
said Liir. "If you bite me, I'll bite you back, and return your own
rabies to you. Go away."

 "That's a capable awning you have." The Grite wrinkled his face. "My
eyes aren't what they used to be. What is it?"

 "It's a cape," said Liir. "What business is it of yours?"

 "That's the Witch's cape," said the Grite. "I don't believe it. Where
did you get it?"

 "I took it," said Liir.

 "More fool you. She'll have your head before nightfall."

 "She's dead," said Dorothy. Smugly.

 The Grite's eyes bulged, and he pushed his face nearer to Dorothy, who
flinched and drew back from him: He wasn't an especially handsome
specimen of his family. "The Witch is dead? Can it be true?"

 They nodded, each one of them.

 "Oh, the shock of it." The Grite clutched his paws and worried them
back and forth. "The shock of it! The Witch is dead?"

 The wind itself answered in a kind of obbligato descant:The Witch is dead!

 "Get out of here," said the Grite in a colder voice. "Go on."

 "I thought you'd be glad," said Dorothy.

 The retort was crisp and censorious. "We held her in considerable
regard. There have always been some Animals who would have marched at
her side, right to the gates of the Emerald City, had she believed in
armies, had she ever given the word. You'll find no comfort among us."

 "She was my friend," said Liir. "Don't confuse us with assassins."

 "You're a fledgling. You could barely manage to befriend her cape, let
alone the Witch herself." To Dorothy he added, "Move along, little Miss
Thug and accomplices, before I call on reinforcements to deal with you."
The Grite sniffed the raw air as if expecting to find proof of their
assertions in the smell of the revised world. "The Witch is dead. It
can't be. Wait till Princess Nastoya hears. Wait until the Wizard hears."

 He was lost to his own ruminations, and turned to look up at the statue
of Lurline. "Give us guidance!" he said. "Speak, for once."

 The storm thundered very nearby. Everyone shuddered but the Grite. "I
mean, speak in a language we can understand," he clarified. But the
storm, or Lurline within its might, didn't oblige, and indeed, moments
later the worst of the downpour was done, and the thunder shunted elsewhere.

 The Grite continued. "I have no reason to give comfort to mine enemy,
but there you are. You may be villainous, but you are young, some of
you, and perhaps might learn to repent. I'm told that Wizardic
battalions are encamped on the banks of the Vinkus River. Find the
Wizard's forces and they will protect you. That's my advice to you."

 "The Wizard's armies willprotect us?" snapped Liir. "The Wizard of Oz
is a menace!"

 "Of course he is. A despot, a suzerain, call it what you will. The
boss. And you've abetted him in his campaign to wipe out the western
resistance. This news will travel fast, my friends." Every time he said
the wordfriends, it sounded less friendly. "But take protection where
you can. When the word of the death of Elphaba Thropp spreads through
these hills, you'll have a very difficult time of it. I won't answer for
what happens next. You've heard my advice. Heed it."

 "I'm not giving myself up to any corps of the Wizard's army," said
Liir. "If there are forces down the eastern side, we'll keep to our plan
to veer west, and take our chances through Kumbricia's Pass. It'll be a
longer route but a safer one."

 "Perhaps we'd better get going," said Dorothy, nervously.

 "You had better go on," agreed the Mountain Grite. "I won't join a
posse against you, but nor will I lie to my friends about what I've
learned here today. The clouds are passing over. If you've intended to
take the hairpin track down the western slope of Knobblehead Pike,
you've overshot. You'll have to back up. You won't reach the river
valley before dark. Shelter under a black willow; you'll find a stand of
them where the track levels out and circles a bit of highland swamp.
You'll be safe there."

 "Thank you," said Dorothy earnestly.

 "Don't be a fool," said Liir. "Thank him for what?"

 "You," said the Grite to the Lion, "are a turncoat. You ought to be
ashamed of yourself. I'd be especially wary if I were you. Animals don't
take lightly to traitors. If you were more of a Lion, you'd know that."

 "I did nothing!" said the Lion. "I was locked in the kitchen!" His tail
twitched eight or ten times.

 

 THEGRITE KEPT HIS WORDand ratted on them. Before the travelers had
finished washing the next morning, a scouting party of Scrow appeared at
the edge of the black willow grove. Riding bareback and nearly naked on
their purple-white steeds, they looked like wild centaurs in the mist.
Without a word but with considerable glower the Scrow contingent circled
the grove. There, the travelers were kept loosely penned. Attempts to
negotiate were fruitless; they had no language in common.

 The languages of Oz. Liir had never thought about them. The father
tongue had always seemed universal; even Dorothy spoke without peculiar
inflections or special difficulty. True, the dialect of the mountain
clans, the Arjikis, was characterized by the growling of syllables
halfway down the throat--but the difference had made little impression on
Liir. He could still understand the Arjikis.

 So why would the isolated Mountain Grite speak the common tongue with
clarity and effect, while the Scrow clung to a language only they
understood?

 Right up to the end, the Witch had kept trying to teach the winged
monkeys to speak, as if to be able to testify might save their lives
someday. So much bound up in language... e language of spells
themselves--spells,of all things! A way to order sounds to make things
shift, reveal what is hidden, conceal what isn't...  He wished he had a skill for language. He wished he could spell magic
as, with effort and increasing control, Elphaba had learned to do. He
would bind the Scrow frozen, and he and his companions would walk away
safely. But this was beyond him--like everything else.

 The Scrow scouts tossed the travelers hanks of repugnant dried meat and
smoked corn. It was clear Dorothy and company were to wait here. A day
and a half later, the leader of the Scrow arrived, traveling in a
slow-moving caravansary that with considerable care negotiated the path
to this low-lying western ridge of Knobblehead Pike.

 The party included a translator, so Liir found himself requesting an
audience with the Highness behind the shabby drapes of the palanquin. He
wasn't skilled at bargaining. "The only thing I request is that we, uh,
hurry," he said. "My friend Dorothy wants to get safely to the Emerald
City; she has an appointment with the Wizard. Then she intends to travel
abroad somewhere."

 And I with her, he thought to add, but didn't. Would she have me? And
if not--what else am I going to do?

 The translator was an old, gnarled Scrow gentleman who, despite his
tribal appurtenances, had been trained in the university environs of
Shiz. "Very well," he said. "I don't see why we should dally. It is in
all of our interests, after all. Give her Highness a chance to compose
herself, and we shall let you know when she's ready."

 Dorothy said, "We don't think much of crowned heads where I come from.
Who is this Highness?" The interpreter left without answering.

 "How rude," said Dorothy. "Well, whois she, this Highness? Might it be
the Ozma everybody goes on about?"

 Liir explained. "The last Ozma disappeared many years ago, kidnapped as
a young girl when the Wizard came to power. Nanny believed the child had
been bewitched in a trance, never to grow older by a day until the
moment she was released from the charm, like a fairy-tale princess. Then
she would rise up and smash the mighty in their comfort, and return the
monarchy to its rightful place. But Auntie Witch always pooh-poohed
that. She said the child had probably been murdered long ago. The
remains of the Ozma Tippetarius would be found deep in the bone bins of
the Palace, along with her ancestors, if anyone were allowed to look there."

 "I believe in Ozma," said the Scarecrow staunchly.

 Mindless fool, thought Liir, but said nothing more.

 The court of the Scrow didn't keep them waiting for long. When the sun
had reached its zenith, attendants unrolled a green carpet with a
puckered selvage. Shapeless pillows, sour with mildew, were placed
about. "Stand until her Highness is seated," the translator said,
arranging in a kind of lattice pattern the remaining hairs on his pale
domed head. "Then you may be seated, too."

 She was helped out of her compartment by six retainers. Her muscles
were of little use in holding up her bulk, and her large, sagging face
twisted into seams of overlapping skin. She grimaced at the pain of
every step. An old woman, a monolith of an ancient Scrow matron, easily
the size of all her retainers standing together. Like a queen bee among
drones.

 Her face was scored with green and purple smudges, some sort of
ceremonial marking. The waft of vetiver and lily water, pleasant enough,
couldn't entirely disguise an animal odor.

 "Princess Nastoya," said the translator in comprehensible Ozish, "may I
present Dorothy Gale, of parts unknown, and her companions, a Lion, a
Scarecrow, a gentleman clad in Tin, and the boy about whom you've been
told." He then repeated the lines in Scrow, to indicate how he would go on.

 "How do you do?" said Dorothy, curtseying.

 Princess Nastoya was lowered to the ground so she could regard them
while reclining on her side. Her spine was preternaturally long, as if
she possessed extra vertebrae. The servants propped her knees on a
yellow cushion, and her elbow on another, and they arranged a small
mountain of cushions behind her so she wouldn't roll backward.

 The interpreter began a flowery biography, but the Princess cut him
off. Her voice was low, tympanic, as if her nasal passages were large
enough for the storage of melons.

 "I am sore with disbelief," she said, the interpreter translating. "I
had only known that the Witch sent out Crows to call for help. Before
they could reach me, they were attacked and their flesh devoured by a
posse of nocturnal rocs."

 "How do you know about the Crows?" asked Liir. "If they were eaten by
rocs?"

 "Nocturnal rocs are mute beasts," said the Princess, "but the attack
was witnessed by a Grey Eagle who keeps an eye on a certain district for
me. He drove the rocs away from one Crow, who managed to pass on the
message of the Witch's embattlement before dying. The Eagle delivered
the message to me as I was closing a convocation with some of the
southern Arjiki clans."

 "The Witch ought to have been told about that," said Liir. "She
considered herself an honorary Arjiki, sort of."

 "I won't be lectured on strategy or protocol," replied the Princess.
"In any case, I did invite her. But I never knew if my invitation got
through. I was told that she was distracted with grief over the death of
her sister."

 "She was... steady...  the end," admitted Liir. "I’m n't sure how much
she could have done for you, or if she would have bothered. In truth,
she was kind of a hermit. She kept to herself." Even when it came to me,
he remembered.

 "I'd have put the case forcefully to her, had I gotten her attention,"
asserted the Princess. "She was no fool. She saw that when the
breadbasket of Munchkinland was ruinously taxed by the Emerald City's
chancellors, it had to break away and form a Free State. If pressed, we
here in the west will do no less than that ourselves. My attempts to
build an allegiance with the Yunamata have come to naught, and the
Arjikis can enjoy their own insularity, obstinate slope dwellers!--but we
Scrow will not stand by and let our Grasslands be plundered. The Wizard
is amassing an army on the eastern slope of the Kells. I know how he
works, you whippet."

 The Princess groaned. "She might have been a help! But it is too late.
I hear through the report of a Mountain Grite that the peculiar woman is
dead. Elphaba."

 The interpreter pronounced it wrong. "EL-phaba," said Liir.

 "Is the murderer here among us?" asked the Princess.

 "It was an accident," said Dorothy. "I didn't mean it." She put the end
of one of her pigtails into her mouth and chewed it.

 "The deceased was a curious creature," said the Princess. "I only met
her once, but she impressed me with her stamina. She did not seem the
type to die."

 "Who does?" said Dorothy.

 "Speak for yourself," muttered the Lion. "I die a little bit every day,
especially if there are unfriendly faces in the room."

 Through her factotum, the Princess continued her message. "You are in
grave danger. Not least from me. Murder and theft of the Witch's
belongings, the way I see it, but even worse: doing so in collusion with
the Wizard."

 Liir protested, sputtering. "Not in collusion with the Wizard!"

 "Well, the Wizard of Ozdid ask me to kill her," admitted Dorothy. "No
use crying overthat spilt milk. He did, and I won't lie about it. But I
didn't intend to do it. I just wanted her forgiveness for the accidental
death of her sister. And then there was the bucket of water. And how was
I to know? I mean, we don't have witches back home in Kansas. We
wouldn't hear of it."

 "You've got it all wrong," interrupted Liir. "Listen, Princess Nastoya,
please. I lived with the Witch all my life. There's no question of
theft. I am the next of kin."

 "How so?"

 He couldn't answer. The Princess pressed her point.

 "Can you prove it?"

 He shrugged. His skin was neither green, like Elphaba's, nor musky
ocher, like Fiyero's children and widow. Liir was rather pasty, in fact;
not a convincing specimen of anything, when you got right down to it.

 "It is no matter," said the Princess. "I would not kill you. Oh no, I
would not. But others might, and I wonder if I could prevent them. We
have no sway with the Arjikis, as the collapse of my recent campaign shows."

 "Why would the Wizard's armies bother to raise a hand against us?"
asked Liir. "The Witch is dead, and the ruling family of the Arjikis--the
house and line of Fiyero--has been obliterated."

 "Even the daughter?" asked the Princess.

 Liir's mouth dropped. "Do you mean Nor? Have you heard otherwise about
her? What can you tell me of her?"

 "I have capable ears," she answered, but continued. "Can you prove the
Witch is dead?"

 "You want us to bring her back to life?" Liir scoffed. "You might as
well kill us now, if that's your demand."

 The Princess indicated that she wanted to stand. "It's the neck, it
creaks under the weight of too much heavy thinking," she said. It took
nine men to cantilever her to her feet, and then they brought her a pair
of jeweled canes as thick as newel posts. She leaned forward and fixed
Liir in the eye.

 "You would be of no help at treaties, you boy-calf," she said. "But you
wonder whatdo I want of you."

 She let her mirrored shawl slip off her shoulders, and three black
ivory combs clattered to the ground from her knotted hedge of thick
white hair. The air grew very still, and clammy; there was a sense of
Presence. The Princess closed her eyes and droned, and her hair seemed
to pick at itself, and then to gather into a sleek sliding thing, and it
ran off her back into a white coil on the ground. The shapeless gown of
cotton geppling shifted on her hips, appeared to draw itself up into a
peplum or a bustle, and then it snaked off.

 Liir had never seen an unclothed woman before, old or young--only little
Nor on washday, lithe in the copper tub, when she'd been a girl of four
or five. The effect of a naked Princess was startling, the print of
silvery hair at the groin, the pockets of flesh folding one over the
other, the bosom flattened by age and gravity. Dorothy murmured
"Goodness!" as if she thought she must be witnessing exactly the opposite.

 If this was magic, it was still spelling time. The Princess's nose was
lengthening, uncoiling, and the skin on her cement-colored cheeks
stretched and thickened epibolically. Her eyes, which had been little
more than slits in the folds of her face, lost their ovoid shape,
rounded into marbles. A net of fine hairs sprouted on her brow and pate,
her cheeks and chin and dramatically hostile nose. And ears:--yes, they
were capable and then some.

 More or less like an Elephant head, though not planted on an Elephant body.

 "Perhaps I ought to have given you more warning," she said. "It seems
I've upset the girl." Dorothy was retching into her apron, and her dog
appeared to have had a nervous fit and passed out. "I have little use
for niceties at this stage in my life, though."

 Liir didn't trust himself to speak.

 "I am an Elephant," said the Princess Nastoya. "From the Wizard's
pogroms against the Animals, I have been in hiding as a human all these
long years. I'm admired by the Scrow for my longevity and what passes
for my wisdom. In exchange for their protection, for a home in the
Thousand Year Grasslands, I have performed my duty as a leader. But of
late, young boy-thing, I am unable to shuck off my disguise with the
ease I once had. Though Elephants pretend to immortality, I believe I am
dying. I must not be allowed to die in this half-form. I will die as an
Elephant. But I need help."

 "How can I be of service?" asked Liir. As if I could do anything, he
added to himself.

 "I don't know," said the Princess Nastoya. "I once told Elphaba Thropp
that if she needed help, she was only to send word, and I would put all
my resources under her command. I never thought that the reverse would
happen. That the time would come for me to apply to her for her
knowledge of Animals, her native skill at spells and charms. But I have
started too late, I see, for your companion has murdered my only hope."

 "Dorothy was not to know," said Liir.

 "Any murder at all, of any sort, is a murder of hope, too."

 "It's disgusting, actually," whispered the Lion to the Tin Woodman. "Do
you know, my stomach is turning as we speak."

 "I don't have a talent at spells," said Liir. "If that's what you're
asking."

 "How do you know?" asked the Princess. "Have you tried? Have you studied?"

 "I'm not a good student, and furthermore I'm not much interested."

 The huge proboscis whipped up from nowhere. Her nose-digits grabbed his
chin. She would crush his skull, chin-first. "Get interested," she said.
"Get interested, or get help. If you're not to be murdered for your
crimes against Elphaba--and that might yet happen--get yourself enough
knowledge from someone, somewhere, to help. Was there a book, a
Grimmerie? Did Elphaba have associates? I don't care how long it takes,
but come back to me. I can't die like this. I won't. In the end, all
disguises must drop."

 "You confuse me with someone else," he said. "Someone with competence.
Someone I never met."

 "This isn't a request," she said. "It's an order. I am a colleague of
Elphaba's." She lifted her nasal limb from Liir's chin and blew her own
horn in his face. His eyes stewed in his skull, and some of the hair at
the front of his scalp was raked bloodily away by the force of the
blast. "If you claim to be a relation of the Witch's, you will figure
out what to do. She always could."

 "Well, not always," Dorothy corrected her helpfully, "as is woefully
apparent at this moment in time."

 "I will pay you," concluded the Princess, apparently addressing Liir
alone. "I will keep my ears to the ground for word of your abducted
friend--Fiyero's cub, Nor. Nor, was it? Come back to me with a solution
and I will tell you all I've been able to learn in the meantime."

 Liir couldn't speak, but he held out his hands, palms up, in a gesture
even he couldn't read. Accepting the task? Protesting his inadequacy?
Whatever--it didn't matter. The Princess was done with them. She turned
her massive Elephant head, wobbling on its all-too-human spine, and a
dozen Scrow rushed to hold her up. They cloaked the acreage of her
buttocks, as if to protect her from a sort of ignominy that, anyway,
could never have attached itself to her. Even a half-thing, trapped in a
decaying spell, she was too much herself for shame to apply.

 

 "SHE DIDN'T KEEP ONE OF USas a hostage," said the Lion, almost
delirious. "I was sure it was going to be me. But I could never have
dealt with it."

 "She trusted us," said Liir.

 They settled into a pattern of traipsing day after day, under skies of
broken cloud and brittle light. To avoid the Wizardic armies, they kept
to the western base of the Great Kells. In places the upright thrusts of
the mountains rose from the grassland floor as cleanly as the front of a
corncrib meets a level floor: one could almost mark with a pencil where
the plain stopped and the slope began.

 They rested where they could. At least it wasn't a bad time of year to
be making their way cross-country. They skirted the edge of the Thousand
Year Grasslands, ants in single file on the fringe of a carpet of
prairie. After several weeks, they reached the verdant apron that rose
into the gorge known as Kumbricia's Pass, a high and fertile valley
affording the quickest way through the central Kells.

 Liir remembered it vaguely from years past. The air was dense and damp,
and the ground quilted with decaying vegetation. If Princess Nastoya had
not been able to engage the local Yunamata tribes in a treaty against
the Wizard, it was likely she hadn't been able to extend her offer of
protection through their territory, either. But the Yunamata kept
themselves hidden, as was their way.

 Beyond, heading downslope toward the Vinkus River and eventually the
Emerald City, the world seemed cold and sore. The year was moving on.
The occasional foothill farmhouses were crude, almost derelict, roofing
thatch thick with mildew, gardens thin on the ground. If bread was
offered, it was offered sullenly. No locals would take them in and
provide anything like a mattress. The corner of a barn and a blanket
crusty with pigeon droppings were the best the travelers could hope for.
Still, exhausted with plodding, they slept hard and dreamlessly.

 To Liir, it wasn't a question of how many days or weeks it took to
reach the Emerald City, but how many hours a day he had to trudge before
he could sink back into a safe sleep again. Not sleep, something richer:
blissful annihilation. So he could forget the sideways throb of his
flattened heart kicking:You. You. You . He kept the thought of Elphaba
there, unwillingly; it pressed painfully against membranes so interior
he had never known their existence before.I hated you. You left me. So I
hate you more than I used to .

 The Kells dwindled, the scrubby flatland spread its wastes in fields of
shattered stone. Oakhair forests began first to fringe the horizon, and
then to loom with oakhair breath and the sound of wind in their
leaves... ttle of this registered on Liir without his wanting to say,
"Look, look--the world you hated so much that you left it behind. It's so
weird. I can see why."

 He couldn't say this. He could hardly think it, with Dorothy rabbiting
on about Auntie Em and Uncle Henry and various forgettable
farmhands.Elphaba , thought Liir.Elphaba , he felt.Elphaba . The world
without you.

 How am I to manage?

 

 THE KELLS HAD LOOKED CLEAN,conceived by a keen architectural eye, and
thrown up with confidence. By contrast, the Emerald City, on first
sight, seemed organic, a metastasis of competing life-forms. Liir had
never seen a settlement larger than a hamlet before, so he was flummoxed
at the way the City punched itself against the horizon. Flummoxed, and
daunted.

 "Don't be scared," said Dorothy, catching his hand. "Think of it as a
thousand farmsteads piled on top of one another."

 "Andthat isn't a scary notion?"

 "I am going to find myself here," declared the Tin Woodman.

 "I'm going to lose myself," said the Lion.

 "Just try to blend in," said Dorothy. "Act natural."

 "Now thatwould be acting," said the Tin Woodman, and barked one calf
percussively against the other to underscore his point.

 "Come on," said the Scarecrow, "we're in luck." He indicated a motley
crew of traveling players advertising a silly new show done mostly with
puppets. They were amusing the guards, and in the commotion the Yellow
Brick Road Irregulars and Liir managed to sidle undetected through the
City's west portal. They debouched into a broad square. Judging from the
stink of skark manure, the space served as a holding pen for beasts of
transport while cargos were being unloaded and bills of lading composed.
Plain granite storehouses faced the yard, and bears--or possibly even
Bears, talking beasts, though they weren't talking now--were hauling
sacks of grain and crates of produce. "Ho," yelled the overseers. Some
were Munchkins, a third the height of their laborers. Their landing
whips loosed splatters as of red rain.

 "We're meat here, meat," groaned the Lion. "Not that it's all about me,
but I feel soexposed ."

 "The Lion's right. Come, let's duck down this alley," said Liir.

 "I'd expected a bit more fuss," said Dorothy. "I mean, like it or not,
the Witch is dead, and you'd think the word would have gotten out." She
held her own nose with one hand and Toto's nose with the other. "Kansas
boasts henhouses sweeter than this."

 They wandered through commercial districts, crossing wide boulevards
lined with dying cypress trees. Some were splintered in half, pulled
down for such tinder as they might provide. Many open spaces, around
fountains memorializing successful military campaigns, were filled in
with makeshift homes, some cardboard, or oilcloth stretched over chicken
wire. Cooking pots stank of dinner. The broken spout from a fountain
still trickled a little: a common toilet. "Ugh," said Dorothy. "My
earlier visit didn't take me through this neighborhood."

 "You had civic guides," guessed Liir. She nodded.

 The people of the boulevards ducked behind the shawls tacked up as
curtain-doors, or hid their faces in sheets of old newsprint when the
travelers passed. "You'd think we were leprous," said Liir.

 "Perhaps we're too clean," said Dorothy. "We shame them."

 Liir didn't think Dorothy was as clean as all that, but her eyes were
bright and her step sure, and perhaps that counted more than
cleanliness. "Maybe they're used to police action against them, and they
just don't know which side we represent," said Liir.

 "Oh, really," said the Tin Woodman. "Look at us: a man of straw, a man
of tin, a Lion with a bow in his hair like a lapdog! A girl, a boy, a
surly little dog. How could we possibly be authorities? We're too--"

 "Unique?" asked Dorothy.

 "Lacking in camouflage?" asked the Lion.

 "Fabulous?" proposed the Tin Woodman.

 "Ridiculous?" asked Liir.

 "All of the above," decided the Scarecrow. But the indigent seemed not
to be convinced and avoided the peculiar travelers.

 

 WHEN THEY REACHEDthe great piazza before the Palace of the Wizard, Liir
wanted to hang back. The Witch had despised the ruler of Oz; how could
Liir show his face? "Don't be a sissy," said the Lion, "I've got that
covered for us all."

 "It's not fear," said Liir, though it was, in part. It was also anger,
he realized. How capable, how flexible anger was: he could feel it for
the Witch, who had gone and died on him, and for the Wizard, the
orchestrator of her murder, both at once. Then why, for Dorothy, did
Liir feel nothing but an increasing exhaustion? Perhaps he harbored a
zesty secret anger toward her, too, but if so it kept itself in
disguise. If Liir lashed out at Dorothy--well, what would he have left in
the world? Who? Pretty nearly nothing. Just about nothing at all.

 "Well, we can't wait while you dither," said Dorothy. "You'd be a fool
to pass up this chance. The Wizard can give you your heart's desire,
after all. He's good at that."

 He remembered a conversation with Elphaba, suddenly.

 What do you want, Liir, if the Wizard could give you anything?

 A father.

 "He's like Santa Claus." Dorothy's eyes were button bright with
apostolic zeal.

 "Don't know what you mean."

 "Santa Claus?Jolly old elf! Magic as anything. At Christmas every year
he comes to your home and leaves you treats, if you're good. Or if
you're not, coal in your stocking. We don't always have extra coal in
Kansas so once he filled my stocking full of manure. I cried like the
dickens but Uncle Henry said it was punishment for me singing too
brightly in the hog pen. I was scaring the pigs shitless, he said, and
here was the proof."

 "The Wizard of Oz puts manure in your socks?"

 "No! Listen and stop being an idiot. I just mean the Wizard islike
Santa Claus: he's a charitable sort. Come and get what you need. What's
to stop you? What do you have better to do?"

 He wobbled. If the Wizard was handing out rewards, why shouldn't Liir
deserve one? He was an orphan now. He didn't need to say who he was, did
he?--or where he came from?

 "He owes you lots." Dorothy was solemn with assurance. "Without your
help, we wouldn't have gotten back alive. The creepy Yunamuffins hiding
on the trail, that repulsive Elephant monster, queen of the Scrow-folk.
I had jeebies crawling all over my heebies."

 "Maybe I will," said Liir.

 What do you want, Liir, if the Wizard could give you anything?

 A father.

 The Wizard couldn't give him a father or a mother, but maybe he could
give him some news of Nor. Now that the Princess Nastoya had awakened a
hope that Nor might still be alive. Or maybe the Wizard had gotten hold
of the missing Grimmerie, somehow. With it, Liir might figure out how to
help the Princess shuck off her disguise. In any event, even to approach
someone as mighty as the wonderful Wizard of Oz would be, for Liir, both
a novelty and an accomplishment: he was hardly more than spinster spawn,
and had seen little of the world of men.

 "Well, come if you're coming; we're off," said Dorothy, so Liir hid the
Witch's cape beneath an ornamental flowerpot in a corner of the deserted
café where they had been sitting, and went with them.

 Dorothy's strategy for getting the attention of the proper officials at
the Palace doors was simple. "I'm Dorothy," she said, "you know.The
Dorothy."

 The guards gawked. Ministers were summoned, and arrangements made for
an interview almost at once. "You're not allowed," said the Secretary of
Audiences to Liir. "You aren't part of the original contract."

 "But I'm here to ask the Wizard for help," said Liir.

 "Piss off."

 Dorothy shrugged, grinned too broadly, and straightened her apron.
"Don't fret, Liir. We shouldn't be more than an hour. All we have to do
is show up, and I'm sure the Wizard will grant our requests. We'll meet
back at that café tonight and decide what to do to celebrate before I
leave."

 "Are you sure you want to leave?" asked Liir.

 "Of course I'm leaving," she snapped. "This is my exit interview. Why
do you think I put myself through this indignity? I didn't ask to kill
the Witch, but having done it, I'm going to collect my reward if I can
possibly manage it."

 He bit his lip. "Then may I come with you?"

 "You wouldn't feel at home in Kansas. Few do. Besides, you're supposed
to be un-bewitching that old freak elephant noggin. Are my pigtails even?"

 She kissed him in a bruisingly incidental manner. Full of stupid trust,
she turned and hurried after her friends. The ceremonial doors banged
behind them.

 Liir went back to the café. Using up almost all the coin he had, he
waited with mounting horror and then failing hopes. She never returned.
He never saw her again.

 She hadn't been much, that Dorothy. Priggish, in a way, proud of her
wide-eyed charity. Her kindness, at first magnificent, had come to seem
a bit--well, cheap. After all, she'd also oiled the Tin Woodman, and
soothed the timorous Lion, and discussed differences between the gold
and silver standards of foreign currency with the Scarecrow, who seemed
for all his brainlessness to be following the whole discussion. She'd
cuddled that rank little dog of hers. In light of all that, her
solicitousness to Liir seemed nothing more than the Next Good Deed.

 Nonetheless, she had been brave, one foot in front of the other, all
the way to the Vinkus, all the way back. When the bells began to toll
throughout the City, and Liir finally worked up the nerve to ask someone
why, Dorothy wasn't mentioned at all. "The Wizard is deposed," they
said. "The Wicked Witch is dead, but the Wizard is deposed anyway. Some
other good witch has been hired to oversee Oz in the interim."

 "Dorothy?" he asked. "What about Dorothy?"

 "Dorothy who?" they replied. The cult of Dorothy had yet to take hold.

 

 ONCE, YEARS BACK,in one of the barns at Kiamo Ko, Liir had been horsing
about with Nor and her brothers. The children of Fiyero and his wife,
Sarima, were high-tempered, and they had persuaded Liir to sit on one
end of a timber that they intended to pivot out over a pile of hay
below. He could jump to his safety! It would be fun, they said. And so
it would have been, had not one of them--Manek, probably--leaped off the
balanced end before Liir was fully positioned. Afraid of smashing
himself on the stone floor of the barn, Liir had lurched to safety
across the edge of a cart. The falling beam failed to kill him.

 However, he knocked the wind out of his chest, and for a minute or two
he was unable to breathe. He could feel his lungs kicking, and his heart
kicking back, but he thought he was dying. The faces of Irji and Nor
peered down over the edge of the loft at him. Lying on his back,
stretching in vain to open his windpipe, he looked up at their faces
contorting with laughter and mild concern.

 What Liir remembered, in as near to extremis as he had experienced in
his short life, was how embroidered these last few impressions of the
world seemed. How the light breaking over the crowns of Irji's and Nor's
heads seemed shaped like segments of overlapping fins, tying the bright
expressions of his friends to the rafters, the cobwebs, the knotholes,
the looped ropes, the stray feathers. All of a piece, all of a piece, he
thought: why did I never see it before, and now I will die and never see
it again.

 Then he didn't die, but lived. His breath punched itself back into
place, and he wailed and his torso hurt and everything splintered into
disjointed elements. As angry as he felt at Manek for making him the
butt of a well-planned prank, he was distressed at the loss of his fine
moment of apprehension: The world belonged together like this. The
pieces related to each other. There was no contradiction, deepest down.
Complexity, yes, but not contradiction. Only connection.

 Now, hunched beneath the doorway of a shuttered butchery in the Emerald
City, with Dorothy so newly met, and just as quickly vanished, he
remembered the incident in the barn at Kiamo Ko. There is no resolving a
good mess, he thought. Every breath one takes is a waking up into
disjointedness, over and over.

 He rocked hard enough to build plum-colored bruises on his shoulders.
They hurt when he prodded them, and he prodded them to make them hurt.

 He had nowhere to go, nothing to do. By day and night he meandered like
the other bits of human trash that drifted up and down the boulevards.
Filching from merchants, begging for pennies, relieving themselves in
public without concern for decency or hygiene.

 Nightly he returned to the café, in case his sense of dread had been
for naught, and Dorothy might still make good on her promise and come
back for him, at least to say good-bye. A lucky thing, too, for on the
fifth day Liir was turning over newspapers looking for scrag-ends of
butter pastry when he was tapped on the shoulder. He turned, half
expecting that the café owner had summoned the police as he'd been
threatening. Instead, Liir found the Scarecrow.

 "You're still here," said the Scarecrow. "Somehow, I thought you would be."

 "Where is she?"

 "She's gone, you know that." The Scarecrow sighed. "You knew she would
go. She was a Visitor, not of our kind; that kind can't stay, you know."

 "How do you know? Maybe you just need to invite them."

 The Scarecrow affected a superior attitude, and that was his only
answer. "A lot is going to change in a very short time," he said. "I
hope it's for the best, but it could get ugly in the interim. I thought
it smartest to let you know. If I were you I would get out of town."

 "No one wants me," said Liir, scoffing. "No one cares to come looking
forme ! No one knows who I am, not even myself. Do you mean that because
someone tittered that the Witch was my mother, I'm in danger?"

 "I don't mean that," said the Scarecrow. "I don't know if anyone here
knows or cares whether the Witch had children, or who they might be. I
just mean there's talk of a cleanup of this neighborhood." He
straightened up--he'd been limping, an odd thing for a Scarecrow--and cast
his clumsy gloved hand down Dirt Boulevard, where the denizens of the
evening were in their cups. A small crowd had gathered around a couple
of half-naked teens making dirty right there on the ground. The
tatterdemalions were pelting them with bits of food and egging them on.
Elsewhere, bottles emptied of their beer smashed on paving stones. A
baby cried piteously.

 "What is happening?" said Liir.

 "The Wizard has left, and Dorothy is gone, and Lady Glinda Chuffrey,
née Arduenna of the Uplands, has been importuned to supervise a
government until something more permanent can be arranged."

 "Glinda! I heard of her. The Witch used to talk about her sometimes.
Well, she'll do some good, won't she?"

 "Doing good, cleaning house, takes a mighty strong broom," said the
Scarecrow. "Speaking of which... 
 The Scarecrow looked this way and that. The kids on the ground,
wheezing and humping in their throes of lust, had secured the crowd's
full attention. The Scarecrow reached into his waistband and, hand over
hand, drew out a stake. No, a pole--the handle of the broom. The Witch's
broom. Aha. Hence the limp.

 He gave it to Liir. "No one wanted it," he said. "No one needed it for
anything. It served its purpose and was going to be thrown out."

 Liir accepted it with resignation; one more thing to carry back to the
home he no longer had. "What do you mean, things are going to get ugly?
Seems to me they're pretty ugly around here already."

 "Well, I mean, for the ceremony of Glinda's elevation, they'll have to
relocate the urban poor. For one thing. Glinda's quite tidy and likes
things just so."

 "You seem to know a lot all of a sudden. The brains are working?"

 "There's talk that Lady Glinda will eventually yield, and put a wise
Scarecrow on the throne," the Scarecrow said, pride--or derision--making
his voice sound odd. "After she cleans up the Wizard's affairs. And
there are those who think that the charmed child Ozma will be located in
some cave almost at once, now that the Wizard's gone. Sounds cynical and
desperate to me, but what do I know of government? I've had more access
to information the last few days than the rest of my life put together."

 "A wise Scarecrow on the throne?You? " said Liir, incredulous. "Sorry,
I don't mean to imply--"

 "I," said the Scarecrow, "or someone like me. Frankly, to human beings,
all Scarecrows look the same, which is odd, since we seem to be much
more individual than humans. But we're made in their image and likeness,
so all they see in us is themselves, and one mirror is as good as
another, I guess."

 "Do you want to be king? Now that you're so smart?"

 "Now that I'm so smart, I know enough not to let on what I want," said
the Scarecrow. "We should move away from here, you know."

 Liir roped the heavy cape around his arms and took the scorched broom.
"Any ideas?"

 "Just--away. This is all so unseemly." The Scarecrow indicated the
throng. "You're very young for all this."

 "You're younger than I," said Liir.

 "I was born old," said the Scarecrow. "That's how I was made."

 "I don't know how I was made," said the boy. "That's part of my problem."

 They crossed a small canal into a quieter street and came to rest on a
fundament to which ranks of small private barges and blunt-boats were
tied up for the night. The smoke of cooking fires, the smell of boiled
beans and potato stew hung in the air.

 "I miss Dorothy," he said.

 The Scarecrow replied, "It's the Witch you miss, isn't it?"

 "I hated her too much to miss her."

 "That's what you think."

 "You think your own thoughts, and leave me mine." He was outraged at
the presumption. "What did you know of the Witch? Auntie Witch? Elphaba
Thropp? She was my... e was my witch!"

 The Scarecrow paid no attention. "It's starting, listen," he said. He
held up his hand. The sounds from Dirt Boulevard had altered; a
percussion of horses' hoofs, hundreds of them, came thrumming forward, a
scatter of shouts turning into screams. "I waited too long," the
Scarecrow said. He bundled Liir onto the nearest canal boat. A bearded
old coot with a sawed-off hand turned and raised a hot skillet at the
Scarecrow, but the Scarecrow deflected it with his gloved fist, and the
man tumbled into the filthy water. "Loosen the mooring, push away," said
the Scarecrow, "the neighborhood will be in flames by dessert time."

 2

 CANDLE PUT DOWNthe domingon to rest. Her fingers were swollen with long
red welts. She'd been working hard. The young man--they called him Liir,
was it?--breathed shallowly, but regularly. And he hadn't twitched a
muscle in the hours since Candle had started playing to him.

 At the sound in the doorway, she turned. She expected the Superior
Maunt, but it was her grouchy kitchen boss, Sister Cook.

 "Someonelanded a cushy job where she can sit all day," said Sister
Cook, without real resentment, but she had eyes only for the victim.
Hardly nightfall the first day, and the maunts in the cloister of Saint
Glinda couldn't curb their curiosity. "He's not much to look at, is he?"

 Candle made a soft sound in her throat, a kind of purr. A demur? Sister
Cook wasn't sure. She knew Candle to be capable of following
instructions, so whatever the girl's limitations were, they didn't
include deafness or lack of language understanding. She just didn't
speak up; with her it was mostly glottal molasses.

 Sister Cook wrinkled her nose, as if considering the merits of a joint
selected for the holiday roast. A gauze sheet, nearly transparent,
casting lavender shadows on the lad's near naked form. The coverlet was
woven tightly, affording warmth, and was light enough to be whisked away
when medical attention was required. As the evening came in, the blood
blisters under the skin on this face looked like medallions of honor--or
maybe the sites of subcutaneous leech colonies.

 "I came to make sure you were all right," said Sister Cook at last,
having taken her fill. She turned back to Candle. "Here. We all must do
our part."

 She pulled from her apron pocket a long red frond, fringed with airy,
asparagus-fern stamens. Candle started, and the sound in her throat was
clearly revulsion.

 "Not to worry, it was a willing sacrifice," said Sister Cook. "I was
alone in the yard mincing the cord onions when that Red Pfenix appeared
again. He was distraught. He'd been attacked and wounded by something;
he was bleeding from the throat and couldn't speak."

 Candle shrugged and hit her chest with her hand, turning it outward.

 "Sister Doctor and Sister Apothecaire hate to administer to Animals,
you know that," said Sister Cook. "But it doesn't matter. They couldn't
even if directed to. The Superior Maunt sent them away after lunch. Off
on some investigative mission about those Emerald City novices who had
their faces scraped. So what was I to do?"

 Candle reached out and touched the Pfenix feather.

 Sister Cook said, "Nearly shorn of life, he came back here. He pulled
out his axial feather himself and walked up to me with it in his beak.
Swans sing when they die; Pfenix do, too, but he couldn't. So you make
music for him, please. Out of respect; we're having Pfenix breast tonight."

 Sister Cook shoved both her hands in her apron pockets. "Pfenix breast,
though I've diced them small and disguised them as chicken fingerlings
so our dear old Mother Rush-to-Judgment doesn't have a conniption
stroke. Don't forget to come down when you hear the dinner bell; we
don't get Pfenix around here very often, Animal or otherwise."

 She lingered a moment longer and watched Candle hold the red feather.
It was almost two feet long and still retained some of its vital
elasticity. "Well?" said Sister Cook. "I can't stand here forever. Play
a dirge for the Pfenix, who never made it to his Convention or his class
reunion or wherever he was going. He was interested in your playing, I
saw. Honor him by accepting his gift."

 Candle tried to remember what she had seen of the domingon when it was
played by its maker. She had swooned, for music or love or both, and in
her exhilaration, maybe she'd overlooked an aspect of the instrument's
construction. Maybe it had had a pfenix feather, and the master had
removed it--pfenix feathers weren't easy to come by. And a Pfenix
feather, freely given besides! What she might learn to play now.

 She leaned down and laid the quill end of the feather against the empty
notch at one end of the domingon's lower soundboard. It settled in
perfectly, as if the domingon had been built to accommodate this exact
feather. Then Candle gently coaxed the feather flat. There was a hasp at
the soundboard's far edge, a leather tooth on a sprung hinge that
clamped down hard to hold the pinion end of the tailfeather in place.

 Candle turned the pegs, listening to calibrations of tuning too precise
for Sister Cook to appreciate. Then Candle flung out both her hands at
Sister Cook: Go! Go!

 "Ungrateful, the both of you," said Sister Cook. As she descended the
stairs, she heard the first few notes of an exquisite instrument being
played by an expert. So suddenly it took her back to school days--when
she was a nervous slip of a thing at Madame Teastane's Female Academy,
not the cow she'd become--that she had to steady herself against the
wall. She was thirteen, and suffering her first menses. Coming back from
a dawn visit to the cold lavatories on the third floor, she'd spotted a
red pfenix on the roof of the Master's lodge. The trees had been airy,
just budding, struck with first light, and the bird had looked like red
cloisonné set in warm stone. A stab of loveliness unmerited, unexpected.
It had cheered her then. She continued down the stairs back to the
mauntery's kitchens, cheered again at the long-forgotten thought, though
perhaps she was also happy to anticipate a fine, fine meal that night.

_ Southstairs_

 1

 THESUPERIORMAUNTmade it her business to get to the infirmary on a daily
basis. She didn't like what she saw. The young fellow made no
discernible progress; indeed, a yellowish sweat rolled off him, hinting
of turps. His skin was cold to the touch. He was still breathing, however.

 "You may wipe him down when he becomes too clammy," she said to Candle,
and showed her how. The girl seemed reluctant to touch her charge, but
did as she was bade.

 Holy intuition, the Superior Maunt felt, did not figure among her own
administrative talents. She was a common-sensist. She thought the
Unnamed God had given her a brain to use, not to ignore as a snare of
the devil. She had tried to lift herself up by clear thinking, and
others, too, when she could.

 Nonetheless, it was intuition as much as charity that had inspired her
to call for a musician. This Candle seemed perfect: demure, even of
temper, and increasingly proficient at her instrument.

 The Superior Maunt wasn't overly worried that whatever had befallen
Liir--whatever it was, those bruises, those broken bones!--would afflict
her pair of investigators. The young missionaries from the motherchapel
in the Emerald City, whose faces had been scraped--the boy himself--were
possessed of the loveliness of youth, youth's fine ignorance of its own
fleeting grace. The same couldn't be said of Sister Doctor and Sister
Apothecaire. Through long years of dedication and hard work, they had
grown wizened and doughy, respectively. They would be safe from the
attention of those who wanted to despoil the innocently beautiful. And
their training in medicine had fostered keen observational skills; they
could protect themselves, if anyone could.

 The Maunt Superior noted that though her hearing wasn't good anymore,
the music of the repaired domingon had a way of traveling. The entire
mauntery was filled with its soft phrases. Sister Linenflaxen said it
was elegiac, damn it, Candle was wooing the lad to his final sleep. She
should play something peppier. Everyone else saidshhhh . The whole place
had fallen under a sort of spell. They were waiting to see what would
happen, but the music made them patient.

 Sister Graveside ironed a fresh winding cloth and refilled the corked
jug with anointing oil, to be ready.

 

 CANDLE WAS MORE OBSERVANTthan the Superior Maunt credited, though. She
could see that Liir's respiration responded to her choice of music. He
went through periods of rhythmic breathing, like someone sleeping
peacefully enough, followed by patterns of shallow flutterbreath.

 Restored to glory by the feather of the Pfenix, the domingon had become
responsive: the harmonic overtones hung in the air and complemented one
another. When the invalid seemed too agitated, she would bring him back
with long furling phrases. But too many of those and she was afraid he
would deliver his last, deep outgo and breathe in no more: and then he
would be dead. So she would agitate him with pizzicato comments and
thumb-struck flat-tone responses, to alert his lungs and stimulate his
heart.

 She was guiding him. She knew it. She just didn't know where he was.

 

 LIIR WAS IN THE STOLEN BLUNT-BOATwith the Scarecrow, heading along one
of the waterways of the Emerald City. It was a week or two after the
Witch had died. There was trouble behind, and darkness ahead, but the
windows of the town mansions that lined the canal--one flight above
street level, above the barricaded stables and stout front gates--threw
trapezoids of gold light onto the stinking canal water. Liir and the
Scarecrow passed in and out of one another's view.

 "Whatwill you do?" asked the Scarecrow. "Where will you go?"

 "I have no place to go," said Liir. "I'm not going back to Kiamo Ko.
Why should I? Only old Nanny there."

 "Have you no obligation to her?"

 "Nowyou ask me? In a word, no. Chistery will mind her well enough."

 "The Snow Monkey? Yes, I suppose he will. Well, the story of Dorothy is
done. We won't see her like again."

 "And a good thing, too," said Liir. "Off and away with the fairies,
just like that, and not so much as a decent good-bye!"

 "Her departure was precipitous," agreed the Scarecrow. "Glinda made the
arrangements in something of a hurry."

 The light from a party, candles laid out on a balustrade. The music
wafting out open doors: agitated phrases, comments and responses, from
some instrument with multiple voices, or many instruments playing very
close together. Haunting!

 The Scarecrow said, "Don't fasten on Dorothy. Only unanswerable longing
lies down that road. Gone is gone."

 "How wise you are, now that you're packed with brains. Everyone got
some party favor from the Wizard except me. Everyone's got somewhere to go."

 "Don't look to me for a map, Liir. Figure it out for yourself. What
about your friend, Nor? That Princess Nastoya seemed to think she might
still be alive. Maybe you could find her."

 "First I better learn a trade and find a way to support myself. Or
watch how the pickpockets practice their trade. Sure, I would like to
find Nor, but I'd like to fly, too. Not bloody likely without some help."

 "I can't be much help."

 "Too highly connected now, I'm sure. Too chummy with the chief cheeses."

 "I have my own plans. Appointments to keep. I'm out of here as soon as
I can."

 "I thought that Glinda person had singled you out for a lead position
in the government. That's what they're saying on the streets, where I
pick up my news and other garbage."

 "Lady Glinda doesn't confide in me. I've heard she intends to rule for
six months or so, and then abdicate in favor of a straw man. Who?--well,
as I've admitted, one scarecrow is as good as another. Do you think
anyone would notice the difference? When a scarecrow blows apart in a
gale wind, the farmer just props up another one. It's the job to be done
that's important, not who does it."

 "That's what they used to say at the mauntery," said Liir. "If a maunt
dies and goes to the Afterlife, another maunt comes to take her place.
Like replacing a pane of glass. It's the work that's important, not the
individual who does it."

 "Well, I'm keeping my own counsel about my plans," said the Scarecrow,
"and I'm not long for the Emerald City, I'll tell you that much. One day
you're a celebrity, the next day you're hauled off to jail."

 They contemplated this as they came upon a weir. From here, a system of
locks stepped the water level down steeply until it disappeared into a
fortified grate. Above, armed members of the Emerald City Guard were
having a smoke around a brazier. "Better not get their attention," said
the Scarecrow.

 "What's over there, that the canal is guarded?" whispered Liir as they
regarded their situation.

 "Not sure. Couldn't say. But it might be Southstairs."

 "Southstairs? What's that?"

 The Scarecrow made a face in the gloom. "The high-security prison for
the heartland. Don't you know anything? I've only been here a week and I
know that."

 "Why would they be guarding the canal grate?"

 "Who knows? Maybe they're afraid there'll be a move to liberate
Southstairs. I'm told a lot of professional Animals ended up there over
the decades, cheek by jowl with murderers, pedophiles. Rapists.
Political pamphleteers."

 "The Wizard's gone. Why aren't they just throwing the gates open?"

 "You want the murderers and rapists back in the neighborhood?"

 "Well--no. No, but for the dissenters."

 The Scarecrow frowned. "Dream on. Who's going to take it upon
themselves to decide which is which at this point? The job of personal
fiscal betterment is far more urgent."

 "Hard to argue with that. And I bet the suppressed Animals agree with
you. Are they on the move, do you know? Or hanging low until they see
what develops?"

 "Look, I got you safely away from Dirt Boulevard before you were swept
up in a purge. I'm not going to deliver you to Southstairs so you can
check on the Animals there. Let's turn about."

 The Scarecrow piloted the blunt-boat backward until there was room
enough to swing it around. Their route took them back under the
balustrades where the fancy-dress ball was in progress. The laughter was
more unguarded, even strident, the music brassier. "Lots to celebrate
these days, for those of the right station," said the Scarecrow. "Good
news indeed. Could be another Victory Gala."

 "Celebrating the Wizard's departure?"

 "Celebrating the Witch's death," said the Scarecrow. His face was
impassive. "Oh, sweet Oz, it's Glinda's house!" He tucked his head down.
"Liir!"

 "She doesn't know me," said Liir. He scrambled backward along the boat
to its squared-off stern, a small elevated platform for the loading of
goods. Craning, he could see a woman leaning her hips against the carved
stone balustrades of the balcony. The light from the ballroom fell on
her golden hair, which was swept up on her head in a bubbly mass of
curls hooped by a diamond tiara. He couldn't see how old she was, nor
her expression, for her face was turned away. She was trim and fit,
though her shoulders were slumped--grief, or despair? Or boredom? She
dabbed a handkerchief at her nose.

 Liir didn't speak, he didn't call out--what did he care for Lady Glinda
Chuffrey? Auntie Witch had mentioned her only in passing. Sometimes with
grudging respect, more often with disapproval. As he watched her,
something echoed along the waters of the canal, a sound--as if a private,
smoky slide of music accompanied their blunt-boat, counterpoint to the
party pandemonium.

 Lady Glinda turned, and gripped the rail with both hands, and leaned
over as their vessel was slipping beneath a pedestrian bridge. "Shit!"
hissed the Scarecrow, and stayed the boat in the shadows by throwing his
weight against the pole. "She's seen us!"

 "Who is it?" called Glinda. "Who's there?--I almost thought--"

 Liir wanted to speak up. The Scarecrow clapped a gloved hand against
his mouth tightly. Liir struggled, elbowed the Scarecrow, but he wasn't
strong enough to break free before Glinda shook her head as if in
disbelief, straightened the epaulets on her ball gown, and returned to
her affair.

 "What's the matter with you?" railed Liir, when the Scarecrow had let
him go.

 "What's the matter withyou ?" said the Scarecrow. "I'm trying to keep a
low profile in order to help you, and you have to go and signal the
heads of state and alert them about it?"

 "I didn't signal her!"

 "Well, she must have a sixth sense then, for she turned, and she saw you."

 "She doesn't know who I am. She doesn't know I exist!"

 "And let's keep it that way."

 2

 THE ANIMOSITY THAT OBTAINEDbetween Sisters Doctor and Apothecaire
subsided once dusk fell on their first evening away from the Mauntery of
Saint Glinda. The women erected the frame of thin skark ribs and fixed
the waterproof awning to it. Then they huddled together under a blanket.
When the wolves of the oakhair forest howled their midnight requiem, the
Sisters mangled their devotions into such a gabble of syllables and sobs
that, had the Unnamed God been condescending to listen, it could only
have concluded that its two emissaries were afflicted with sudden-onset
glossolalia.

 "The Superior Maunt thought it safe to send us out on an exploratory
mission even though the faces of those three young missionaries had so
recently been scraped," said Sister Apothecaire the following morning,
which dawned damp and windless. "I trust her in every particular," she
added fiercely, unconvincingly.

 "Our charge is clear," said Sister Doctor, "safety or no. We are to
make an effort to address the tribal Scrow, if we can locate them, and
certainly the Yunamata. We must enquire about the disaster that struck
those missionaries. With the conviction of our faith in the Unnamed God,
no harm will befall us."

 "Do you propose the missionaries were in greater danger because their
faith was weak?" asked Sister Apothecaire.

 Sister Doctor's lips became thinner as she folded the awning away.
"Cowardice, said the Superior Maunt, will not serve us in this task."

 Sister Apothecaire relented. "Cowardice is a dubious attribute. Yet I
possess it in spades, so I hope on this venture to learn how to use it
to my advantage if I must. All gifts come from the Unnamed God,
including cowardice, and self-repugnance."

 The mules dropped their heavy hoofs on the path, picking a way between
ranks of thin trees with branches nearly empty of leaves. Little cover.

 "Perhaps," said Sister Doctor, "the Superior Maunt sentus out because
we would be better able to tend to each other, medically, were we attacked."

 "If we survived. Well, I've no doubt that our skills here in the
wilderness will prove useful. After all, I do speak a dialect of West
Yumish."

 "When you've had a bit too much seasonal sherry."

 They laughed at that and proceeded in companionable silence until
Sister Apothecaire couldn't stand it. "Now Liir is Candle's
responsibility. Funny little thing. What can she bring to Liir that we
can't?"

 "Don't be stupid. She can bring youth and charm, if she can get his
attention. She can give him a reason to survive. This is something
neither you nor I could do. If he opened up his eyes after a long coma
and saw either of us right off, he'd probably kick the bucket in a nonce."

 Sister Apothecaire did not murmur assent. She was rather proud of her
looks. Well, her face, anyway; her figure was regrettably lumpy.
"Perhaps," she said distractingly, "Candle has a natural talent that the
Superior Maunt can sense."

 "What sort of talent?" Sister Doctor shifted in her saddle and turned
to peer at her colleague. "You don't mean a talent for magic? That's
distinctly forbidden in the order."

 "Come come. You know perfectly well we resort to it when we must. Not
that we're very good at it. I need hardly remind you that these are
dangerous times. Perhaps the Superior Maunt thinks that in the
rehabilitation of the boy, such a talent is called for."

 By the straightening of her spine Sister Doctor signaled that she did
not intend to second-guess the Superior Maunt's motives. Sister
Apothecaire regretted having brought it up. "Well," she continued,
falsely jolly, "I don't have much of a sense of Candle one way or the
other. If she's got common magic or common sense, it's news to me either
way."

 "She certainly has no talent for music." Sister Doctor sniffed. "I do
remember the day she arrived, though. I happened to be suturing one of
the novices in the kitchen. I turned to ask kindly for water, and there
was that Candle, her rickety domingon slung over one shoulder like a
crossbow. Mad old Mother Yackle had her by the hand, as if she'd just
created her out of calves' foot jelly. ‘The gypsy Quadling, her uncle
leaves her to us,' said Mother Yackle."

 "Mother Yackle doesn't speak and hasn't in years."

 "That's why I remember the event so distinctly."

 "Did you see the Quadling uncle?"

 "I went to the window, and he was making his way rather hurriedly
through the kitchen garden. I called out to him, for there are
procedures for the introduction of a novice, and this wasn't one of
them. But he wouldn't be stopped, merely called over his shoulder that
he would be back in a year if he was still alive. It's rare to see
Quadlings this far north these days. I imagine the poor girl is quite
lonely."

 "Well, yes. No one speaks Quaddle."

 "I believe the term is Qua'ati. So is Candle mute or is it that she
just hasn't anyone to speak her native tongue with?"

 "I don't know."

 Perhaps it was Candle's silence and self-control that had inspired the
Superior Maunt to choose her for keeping vigil over Liir. The maunts
began to regret their tendencies to bark and spark at each other.
Thinking on their noisy failings, they fell into a silence now.

 

 IN THE FOLLOWING FEW DAYS,they came across their share of blue
squirrels, bald egrets, and disagreeable emmets. The egrets kept to the
ground cover, rarely taking wing; the emmets preferred the bedding. It
wasn't until near dusk on the fourth day that the maunts came across an
Animal, a lone and pagan Water Buffalo in the shallows of a cove of
Restwater, Oz's biggest lake.

 "Oh, oh," moaned the Water Buffalo at their approach, "not the
missionary voice traveling in twos! Not again! I bury my own waste, I
only speak when spoken to, I lick my knees fifty times a night before I
sleep--what more am I to do to appease the fates? I don't want to be
converted! Don't you understand? Oh, all right, get it over with. I'll
lapse before nightfall, I promise you. I can't help myself. Perhaps I'm
too far gone for you to bother with me?" He peered, both gloomily and
hopefully, at them.

 "We're not converters," said Sister Apothecaire. "We haven't the time."

 "And who cares about you? You can go to hell," said Sister Doctor,
meaning to be cheerful. This was the right note, as it happened; the
Water Buffalo began to smile.

 "Scarcely see a soul coming from your direction who doesn't have
designs on my immortal soul," said the Water Buffalo. "It used to be I
was worried about my hide. I always thought a soul was private, but it
appears it can be colonized against your will if you don't watch out."

 "Well, weare maunts," admitted Sister Apothecaire.

 The Water Buffalo winced. "No. Say it ain't so. You're plates of
glamour and glasses of fashion, as anyone who rests a sore eye upon you
would have to agree."

 "Don't be mincing," snapped Sister Doctor. "These are perfectly
respectable clothes for traveling in."

 "Depends on where you want to get to," intoned the Water Buffalo.

 "Look, we can evangelize like the best of them, if that's what it's
going to take--"

 "Sorry, sorry!" said the Water Buffalo. "I'll be good. What's your game?"

 They told him. He knew nothing of the attacks on the young maunts and
their scrapings, nor had he ever heard of Liir or his misadventure. But
he had seen airborne battalions of trained creatures flying so high that
he couldn't make them out. "Something's amiss," he said. "I know there's
been an attempt to call a Congress of Birds out in the west, but lately
I've seen few Birds brave enough to fly at anything like a decent height."

 "We can't patrol the skies right now," said Sister Doctor. "It's the
Scrow or the Yunamata we need to find."

 "The Scrow rarely venture this far east. However, you may come across a
small band of Yunamata, if they haven't moved off yet. They're down from
Kumbricia's Pass. I came across them bathing this morning. We all minded
our own business. They don't have anything to do with the Unnamed God,
so they don't bother me, and I don't bother them. They rinsed their
totems and washed their hair, and one of them gave birth to a baby
underwater. They're rather froggy folk when it comes to birthing. They
circulated a birth pipe around, passed out in the sun for an hour or so,
and then gathered their things and left. They seemed to be heading
southwest. Several dozen of them, no more."

 "If you see them, tell them we're coming," said Sister Doctor.

 "Jubilation, they'll be over the moon," drawled the Water Buffalo. "If
you want to meet up with them, betternot tell them you're coming, honeys."

 The sisters moved on, but before they had lost sight of the Water
Buffalo, Sister Apothecaire thought to turn and call, "We forgot to ask
your name!"

 "Only the chattering classes of Animal have names!" the Water Buffalo
replied cheerily. "And there hasn't been a professional Animal the
length and breadth of Oz for thirty years. If I don't have a name, I
can't be targeted as a potential convert, can I?"

 A moment later, when he was out of sight, his voice rang toward them
thinly: "Though if you had to locate me, I suppose I'd answer to Buff... 
 "Weird creature," said Sister Apothecaire a while later.

 "He'd survived, a talking Animal in the wild," Sister Doctor reminded
her. "It can't have been easy. After the Wizard's banishment, the
Animals didn't rush for reassimilation. Who could blame them, with all
they'd been through."

 "Sounds as if the creature's been dogged by zealots, though."

 "Indeed. Well, the Emperor is a devout man, and wants all his subjects
to enjoy the benefits of faith, I suppose."

 

 ANOTHER NIGHT,and the wolves howled more fiercely than ever. The dawn
seemed full of its own arcane purpose, a pale light leaching through
grey cloud-hemp. The maunts ventured out across the Disappointments.
Then, easy as playing at knackers, they came upon a group of Yunamata
doing winter rush-work.

 "Hail," said Sister Apothecaire in Yumish, "or have I saidhell by
mistake? Hello? Yoo hoo Yunamata? We come in peace."

 "What are you saying?" said Sister Doctor. "They look mystified."

 "I'm addressing their tribal gods," said Sister Apothecaire, and in
Yumish, "I. Good. Good one. Good human person woman being. I. Good
thing. Where is the library?" In her anxiety it was all she could remember.

 "They look amused," said Sister Doctor.

 "That's respect," said Sister Apothecaire. But amusement was better
than hostility, so she began to relax, and more of the plain tongue
began to return to her.

 The Yunamata were known for keeping to themselves. Nomadic, but not a
horse culture like the Scrow, this Vinkus tribe was fleet of foot and
economical of domestic impedimenta, needing only a few pack animals to
carry their belongings. Generally they sheltered in Kumbricia's Pass or
the forested slopes of the Kells south of there. What were they doing
out in open country?

 Sister Doctor, who never liked to go slumming as a veterinarian, felt
she could sniff out an Animal tendency: the Yunamata looked as if they
might all have one giant, docile Frog among their ancestors. Way, way
back. Nothing like webbing between their digits, no long flickering
tongues, no, no; they were human through and through. But an amphibian
sort of human, with leathery skin, narrow ridiculous limbs, and thin
lips that seemed partly withdrawn into their mouths.

 One could laugh at the silliness of them. Laugh--and then be carved to
shreds, for when aroused they could be a formidable enemy. The Yunamata
had skill with knives. Mostly they used their serrated tools--lethal
curved blades set in handles of the hardest mahogany--for aid in the
construction of their tree nests, where they harbored at night. Those
same knives could carve a pig or eviscerate a minor canon with equal
efficiency.

 Sister Apothecaire set out to convince the Yunamata that the maunts
were abroad neither to betray the clan nor to convert them. Just in
case, like the Water Buffalo, they'd previously been targeted as a
population ripe for conversion. As a group, they listened, promoting no
spokesperson among them. By turns they mouthed small neat phrases.
Sister Apothecaire took pains to translate these remarks to her
colleague carefully, and to question her own understanding if she had
any doubt. She didn't want to assent to human martyrdom merely because
she'd forgotten some nicety of Yumish grammar.Was there a retractional
pluperfect subjunctive in Yumish?

 "You are going on quite a while," said Sister Doctor after an hour or so.

 "I am doing my job and trying to see if we're going to be invited to
stay for supper," said Sister Apothecaire. "Leave me be."

 "I hope they aren't teetotalers. I think I'm getting a sniffle."

 When the conversation had concluded at last, and the Yunamata retreated
to prepare a meal, Sister Doctor said, "Well? Well? I deduce from your
smug expression that they're not about to sharpen their blades to scrape
our faces from us. Though I'd like to hear it put directly, to ease my
mind."

 "They speak by indirection. They know about the scrapings. They have
seen evidence of it. They say it must be the Scrow. The Scrow have a
tradition of royalty, and their queen is an old woman named Nastoya who
has been in declining health for a decade. Were we to fulfill the
mission assigned us, we would next have to hunt for this Princess
Nastoya and reprove her about these infractions. The Yunamata insist
that the Scrow must be in allegiance with the Emperor."

 "Ridiculous. If the Scrow were in allegiance with the Emperor, would
they be scraping his emissaries? Or are the Yunamata lying?"

 "Look at them. Could they lie?"

 "Don't be soft. Of course they could. The most purring of cats can
still kill a bird within half a purr."

 "I suppose I believe them," said Sister Apothecaire, "because theyadmit
to their capacity for vengeance. But they also have told me that this is
the season of the jackal, and out of wariness of the moon's opinion,
they take a vow of gentility. Babies born under the jackal moon are
considered lucky. Babies born in Restwater are luckier still."

 "Are you sure you've understood correctly? Throughout Oz the season of
the jackal is considered dangerous."

 "Perhaps it's a kind of propitiation," said Sister Apothecaire. "They
mentioned the Old Dowager, a kind of deity who harvests souls. She
sounded a bit like Kumbricia. Do you remember Kumbricia, from your
schoolgirl lessons in antique lore? Kumbricia, the oldest witch from the
time of creation? Source of all venom and malice?"

 "I turned my back on such things when I entered a unionist mauntery,"
said Sister Doctor. "I'm surprised you remember such poppydegook."

 "I don't know if we're getting a meal," said Sister Apothecaire,
gesturing, "but look, it appears we're getting a pipe of some sort." A
delegation of Yunamata was approaching with a communal smoke.

 "A vile habit," snarled Sister Doctor, but she determined to do her
best at being sociable, and stomach such barbaric customs as courtesy
required.

 3

 NO ONE AT THE MAUNTERY,Candle included, knew enough about musical
instruments to appreciate the domingon she arrived with. It was made of
seasoned wrenwood by a master from the Quadling Kells, and Candle had
first heard it played at a summer festival. The master himself
performed, using his fingers as well as a fiddle bow and a glass emulant
that he kept tucked under his bearded chin when not required. Now Candle
recalled that the domingonhad been fitted out with a feather, though at
the time Candle had thought it merely ornamentation--and a sexy fillip at
that.

 She had thought she was in love with him, and had slept with him before
dusk, but a few days later she realized it was the music she had loved.
What she heard in its music: a coaxing, an invitation to remember, to
disclose. Perhaps because her voice was small and high, she couldn't
project, and she imagined it would be more gratifying to play music than
to speak. Mercilessly she pestered her uncle to circle back and buy her
the domingon; she'd been surprised when he obliged.

 Candle was not simple, not in the least, but her debility had made her
a still person. She listened to church bells, when they pealed, trying
to translate; she watched the way the paper husks of an onion fell on a
table, and examined the rings of dirt that onion mites had left in
parallel rows on the glossy wet inside. Everything said something, and
it wasn't her job to consider the merit or even the meaning of the
message: just to witness the fact of the message.

 She was therefore a calmer person than most, for there seemed no dearth
of messages from the world to itself. She merely listened in.

 For a week now she'd been playing the domingon until her fingers ached,
watching and listening for the language of Liir's recovery. It wasn't
unusual that she had had experience with men; Quadlings were a casual
sort in matters of sexual prudence. The carnal experience had neither
scarred her nor much interested her. Through it, at best, she had
learned something of the human body, its hesitations and reservations as
well as the surge of its desires.

 In the infirmary, as her eyes moved from the instrument to the invalid,
she felt she was picking up some news. Was it some minor language of
olfactory signals, an arcane pattern of eye twitches, a hieroglyph
etched in the beads of his sweat? She didn't know. She was sure of this,
though: Liir's body seemed the same in temperature, comportment, and
color. But he was going through a phase of crisis, and would either
awaken for sure or die at once: no middle ground.

 She didn't know if she should go get the Superior Maunt or if she
should stay at her post. She was afraid if she left, if she dropped the
domingon on the floor even for the twenty minutes it might take to find
the Superior Maunt and get counsel, she would lose Liir for good.
Wherever he was, he was lost, and the music of her instrument was his
only hope back.

 So Candle stayed seated and played till her own fingers bled, in
ripples of waltz, as if nothing were wrong. The blue of the sky thinned
till it was pierced with star prickers, and then the jackal moon rose
and slowly lumbered over till it could look in the window and watch for
itself. Watch, and listen, as Candle played Liir through his memories.

 

 "SHE'LL BE THERE,"said Liir.

 "Who? Where? Are you talking about Elphaba?" said the Scarecrow.

 "Of course not. I'm talking about Nor. The girl I knew. Maybe my
half-sister, if the Witch really was my mother and Fiyero my father, as
some have guessed."

 "In Southstairs? A girl?"

 "Can you tell me why not?"

 The Scarecrow didn't answer. Liir thought: Maybe he imagines that
someone as insignificant to the mighty Wizard of Oz--a mere girl, no
less--hardly merited imprisonment. Maybe he thinks she might as easily
have been murdered, or tossed onto the streets to drift and starve. How
long had it been anyway since she had been taken from Kiamo Ko? Two
years? Three? But then Princess Nastoya had implied that Nor might have
survived...  They had circled the canals a bit longer and found a place to berth
underneath some rotting trees by the side of a pub. "I can't stay with
you for much longer, you know," said the Scarecrow. "I only came to give
you the Witch's broom, and to wish you well, and to protect you from the
clearing of Dirt Boulevard. I have my own path to follow. I would see
you safely to the other side of the gates of this troubled city if I
could. If you would let me."

 "I'm not going," said Liir. "Not without Nor. Or not without finding
out what has happened to her."

 At a crossroads, unwilling to move, they sat disconsolate.

 "Look," said Liir, at graffiti dashed sharply and sloppily on the pub's
side wall. It saidHAPPY ENDINGS ARE STILL ENDINGS . "You've done your
work, you've kept your word to Dorothy. I have the broom. But I won't be
ushered out of harm's way. What's the point? I have no happy
ending--cripes, I've had no happy beginning, either. The Witch is dead,
and Dorothy is gone, and that old Princess Nastoya has asked us for
help. As if I could! Just because Elphaba would have!"

 "You needn't fulfill some promise Elphaba made. If you're not her son,
you have no obligation there."

 "Well, there's Nor, too. Call it a promise to myself."

 The Scarecrow held his head in his hands. "The Tin Woodman has left to
cultivate the art of caring. He has his work cut out for him, poor sod.
The Lion is suffering severe depression; his cowardice was his sole
identifying trait, and now he's pitiably normal. Neither of them can
help you much, I'm afraid. You should get yourself out of here while you
can. Start over."

 "Start over? I never started the first time. Besides, it's not getting
out that I need to do. It's getting in."

 The Scarecrow pushed a hand against his heart and shook his head.

 "Into Southstairs," said Liir.

 "I know what you meant," said the Scarecrow. "I'm not stupid. Now."

 "You're the one I need to keep on my side--"

 The Scarecrow interrupted with a brusqueness that might have been meant
kindly. "Don't bother to look for me. You won't find me. Save yourself
for someone you might recognize. I'm not in your story, Liir. Not after
this."

 So they took their leave, with little fanfare or fuss. The friendship
between them was no larger or more hopeful than the shape of a scorched
broom, which Liir waved halfheartedly as the Scarecrow loped out of
sight, once and for all.

 The boy sat in the bobbing blunt-boat and listened to the sound of
laughter spilling out the open windows of the pub. The smell was of beer
and vomit, and old urine splashed against the wall. The moon was
invisible behind the clouds. The sound of a tentative waltz, beguiling
and minor, hung over the stinking waters of the canal and the desolate
boy there.

 

 THE NEXT MORNING,Liir presented himself at the servants' entrance of
the town house he'd passed the night before.

 "We don't give handouts and we don't need another coal shoveler, so get
yourself out of here before I assist you with a boot in your behind,"
said the houseboy.

 "If you please, I'm not looking for food or work. Sir."

 The houseboy smirked. "Toadying bastard. Call mesir again, and I'll
beat the crap out of you."

 Liir couldn't follow. "I meant no disrespect. I just want to know how I
can get an audience with Lady Glinda."

 The houseboy's sneer needed rearranging with a good swift kick, Liir
decided, but when the houseboy guffawed, his voice was less hostile.
"Oh, a simpleton. Pardon me, I didn't realize. Listen, the very
Margreave of Tenmeadows, Lord Avaric himself, hasn't been able to get
her ladyship's attention. She's got her hands full, what with the
goings-on in the Wizard's Palace. The people's Palace now. Or should be.
Or will be. What, you want to fling yourself in her lap and call
hermother ? More urchins have tried that already than you could fit on a
barge and drown in Kellswater. Now get off with you."

 "Whatever mother I don't have, it certainly isn'ther ." He held up the
broom and shook it in the houseboy's face.

 "What's that then?"

 Liir said, "You tell Lady Glinda that a boy at the back gate has the
Witch's broom. Tell her Dorothy gave it me. I don't care how long you
take, I'll wait."

 "That thing? That's a corpse of a broom. Not fit for kindling."

 "It's been through a lot. That's how you know it's the real thing."

 "You're a stubborn bugger. I can't be standing here chewing the fat all
day. Tell you what. Do me some magic with that broom and I'll see what I
can do for you."

 "I can't do magic. And the broom isn't a magic wand. It's a broom. It
sweeps."

 "Sweep a floor with that thing, you'll leave char marks, and I'll be
the one cleaning up after you. Get out of here, now. Go on."

 Liir raised the broom again and tilted it forward. The houseboy shrank
back, as if afraid flecks of scorch would fall on his livery. Noticing
this, Liir decided it would be worth his while to wait around and see
what happened.

 His instincts proved sound. The houseboy wasn't able to resist
gossiping about his conversation with Liir. Just before noon, a
housekeeper came out, tucking her apron strings in and wiping crumbs
from her lips. "Love a grouse, you're still here, and that's a good
thing!" she gabbled. "The houseboy's been docked a month's pay for being
silly-headed! Get over here, Her Haughtiness wants to see you at once!
You reek, haven't you washed? The pump, there, boy, scrub your grubby
armpits and wipe that smirk off your face. This is Lady Glinda that
lives here, not some cow-mistress. And hop smart, you. She's waiting."

 

 HE WAS BROUGHT TOa lady's parlor and told to behave and touch nothing.

 He could look, though, and he did. He had never seen an upholstered
chair before. He'd never seen one chair face another chair that looked
identical. Cushions everywhere, fresh flowers, and gleaming crystal
bubbles set on little stands. A collection of commemorative baubles, he
guessed. To what end?

 A fire of aromatic woods burned in the dainty hearth. Why a daytime
fire in such a well-built mansion, when the citizens outside couldn't
get close enough to a brazier to warm their hands, let alone soften
their supper bricks of congealed molasses?

 He wandered to the window to open it, let in some air. It looked out
over the canal where he and the Scarecrow had drifted the night before.
From this height, he could see the rooflines of the fancy houses.
Palaces, almost, or palaces-in-training. Beyond the chimney pots, beyond
the roof gardens, the cupolas and spires and domes, two more massive
buildings rose: the domed Palace of the Wizard, in the dead center of
the City, and off to the right, the steep bluestone ramparts of the
prison known as Southstairs.

 It was like looking at a picture in a book--not that he'd seen all that
many books. Only the Grimmerie, and that only from a distance. Here, the
etched rooflines seemed like a hundred man-made hills. Set here and
there to delight the eye with infinite variety in depth and perspective.

 Under every roof, a story, just as behind every brow, a history.

 He hardly believed he had summoned the nerve to come here. But it was
all he could think of to do. The Princess Nastoya had promised, in
exchange for his helping her, to listen for news of Nor. But why work
backward? The Princess would have to be scrubbing the news of the
Emerald City to learn about Nor. Whereas now--he was here already--so let
Princess Nastoya work out her troubles for herself. Liir had all the
City before him. He would be forthright and claim what he wanted for
himself. On his own terms.

 "The Lady Glinda," announced a man's voice. When Liir turned, the door
was already being drawn closed behind her, and Lady Glinda came near.

 It was like being approached by a decorated holiday tree tiptoeing in
jeweled slippers. Lady Glinda was the most exceedingly dressed person
Liir had ever seen. He almost flinched, but knowing that Lady Glinda had
been a friend of Elphaba's stiffened his nerve. "How do you do," she was
saying, in a voice like a piccolo blowing soapsuds. She tilted her head.
Was it an upperclass gesture, like a genuflection? Ought he pivot his
head in reply? He remained upright. "Liir, is it?"

 "Yes, ma'am."

 He had never called anyone "ma'am" in his life. Where hadthat come from?

 "They said it was Liir. I thought I might have misheard. Please, won't
you sit--" She took a better look at the state of his clothes and changed
her mind. "Would you permit me to take a seat? I'm not resting well
these days, and it's a strain."

 "Of course." He realized he was to remain standing, though he drew a
little nearer. Settling gingerly on a chaise longue upholstered in
peppermint stripes, she arranged a bolster at the small of her back, and
then reclined, lifting one ankle up from time to time. Maybe she had a
twitch.

 "I'm told you have something to show me, a talisman of some sort.
You've got it wrapped in that shroud. A broom, a witch's broom.The
broom? The broom of the Wicked Witch of the West?"

 "I didn't call her that," he said.

 "How did you come by it? Last I heard of it, that Dorothy Gale was
humping it around the Palace like some sort of a trophy, brandishing it
for all to see."

 "I'm told she's gone," said Liir.

 "She is." The tone of authority was convincing. Tired, regretful,
convincing.

 "Gone the way old Ozma is gone? Disappeared? Done in?"

 "Gone is gone," said Glinda. "Who knows, maybe Ozma herself will be
back someday. I wouldn't hold my breath."

 "And maybe Dorothy, too? Or is she gone too far to come back?"

 "You ask bold questions of a lady you've just met," said Glinda, and
she looked at him sharply. "And you haven't answered mine. How did you
come by Elpha--I mean the Witch's broom?"

 "You can say Elphaba to me." Liir unwrapped the broom and held it up
for Glinda to see.

 Glinda didn't look at the broom. She was staring at the Witch's cape.
She hoisted herself to her feet and reached to touch its hem. "I'd know
this anywhere. This is Elphaba's cape. How did you come by it? Answer
me, thug--thief--or I'll have you thrown in Southstairs."

 "Fair enough, I'm headed there anyway. Yes, it's her cape. Why wouldn't
it be? I took it when I left her castle. I'm her--"

 He couldn't sayson . He didn't know. "I'm her helper. I came from the
castle with Dorothy. When the Witch melted, all that was left was the
broom. The Scarecrow brought it back to me after Dorothy vanished. No
one else wanted it."

 "It's a burned stick. Throw it on the fire."

 "No."

 Glinda reached out a hand, and Liir took it. She wanted help getting
up. "Let me look you in the eye, young man. Who are you? How did you
come to be at Kiamo Ko?"

 "I don't know, and that's the truth. But I served the Witch and saw
Dorothy safely to the Emerald City, and I need your help."

 "You needmy help? What for? Bread, cash, a false identity to help you
slip sideways through the cracks? Tell me what you need, tell me why I
should help, and I'll see what I can do. In memory of Elphaba. You knew
her." Her head tilted again, but up, this time, and it was to keep the
sudden wetness from spilling into her carefully colored false eyelashes.
"You knew my Elphie!"

 He would not indulge in cheap grief. "I want to find out what happened
to a girl kidnapped by the Wizard's men a few years back. She lived at
Kiamo Ko when we got there."

 "We?"

 "The Witch and I... 
 "The Witch and you." Her hands reached out hungrily for the cape and
rubbed its hem, as if it were leaves of thyme or hyssop. "What girl
might that be?"

 "Her name is Nor. She is the daughter of Fiyero, one-time prince of the
Arjikis, and his wife, Sarima, also kidnapped that very day. You knew
Fiyero."

 "I knew Fiyero." It was clear Glinda did not want to speak about him.
"Why should I bother with you?"

 "Nor was his daughter. She was my--" Again, he couldn't sayhalf-sister .
He didn't know. "My friend."

 Glinda reached out and took the charred broomstick and cradled it. "I
know about friends."

 "Friends have children," Liir said carefully. "If you can't help your
friends, you can help their children. Do you have children?"

 "I do not. Lord Chuffrey was not so inclined." She reconsidered. "I
mean to say, he is so very old. Old and wealthy. His interests lie
elsewhere."

 She drifted among the occasional tables. "I don't know why this girl
you mention was taken away, or, if she proved that much of a worry, why
she should still be alive."

 "Everyone knows the Wizard is gone. Surely his enemies don't need to
stay imprisoned? If she's alive, why shouldn't she be released?"

 A rustling of stiffened tulle sounded in her underskirts. "How do I
know you are telling the truth?" she said at last. "These are such
treacherous days. I've spent my adult life up till now in salons and
theater boxes, not in closed assembly with grasping,
pinching... nisters." She spat out the word. "Insects. And I thought
girls at school were devious. Here, every impassive expression hides a
bloated ambition for--for dominance, I suppose. And any one of my
so-called loyal cabinet could be sending you in here with a tale
designed to catch at my throat. I must have more proof you are who you
profess to be. This may not be Elphie's cape you're sporting. Maybe my
sorrow tempts me into seeing what I would love to see. This may not be
her broom. Tell me more, you Liir. How did her broom come to be so burnt?"

 "I'm not sure. In truth, I didn't see her die, I only heard what Nanny
and Dorothy and the others said. I was locked downstairs. But the broom
burnt, that's all I know."

 "Anyone could tell a lie!" cried Glinda. "Anyone could burn a broom and
make up a story about it!" She beat herself on the breastplate with a
clenched fist, and suddenly rushed across the room, overturning a small
table and shattering some china dolls. She flung the broom in the fire.
"Look, I could do it, too. There's nothing to it."

 "Take the broom, burn it," he replied. "Take the cape and burn it, too,
or sew it into a hairshirt and wear it under your fancy ball gowns. It
doesn't matter. Give me a way to get to Nor, and to get her out; you can
have whatever you want. I will come back and serve you as I served the
Witch. I have no other plan for my days alive once I answer the question
about Nor."

 Glinda collapsed on the nearest stool and wept. She needed a man to
come and take her in his arms, to give her a shoulder. Liir wasn't a
man, nor was his shoulder made for a highborn lady to weep upon. He
stood foolishly by, twisting his hands, averting his eyes here, there.

 "Look. Glinda, look." In his excitement he forgot to use her title.

 She raised her eyes and turned to where he was pointing.

 The fire still danced and hissed. Some trick of physics caused the flue
to hum faintly like an old folk melody, as if someone were on the
rooftop playing an instrument. The music was not merely consoling--and it
was that--but commanding: look, it said, look. The broom lay on the back
of a log that seethed with flames of pumpkin and pale white. The broom
was untouched.

 "Sweet Oz...  said Glinda. "Liir, take it. Take it back."

 "I'll burn my hands!"

 "You won't." Glinda chortled a few syllables in a language Liir
couldn't understand. "This is one of the few spells I could ever really
master; it came in handy when my husband required me to hand him the
burnt toast on the mornings I thought it my wifely duty to prepare his
breakfast. Go on. Grasp it and bring it back."

 He did, and Glinda was right: the broom had not only neglected to
ignite further--but it also wasn't even warm to the touch.

 "A burnt broom that has had enough, and refuses to burn further... ep
that with you," said Glinda. "I was wrong to doubt you. Whoever you are,
however you came by it, this is the Witch's broom. And so I must trust
you to be telling me the truth."

 She shrugged and tried to smile, and almost began to blubber. "Elphie
would know what to do!"

 "Tell me whatyou know," he said, as softly as he could.

 "I don't have access to the register of prisoners in Southstairs
Academy, which is the place your--Nor--is most likely to be if she wasn't
murdered long ago. I'm not even sure a register is kept. But I know
someone could get you in, at least. Whether you could find Nor or get
her out, or yourself either, I can't guess. But I can make introductions
for you; in memory of Elphaba, I will do that much."

 "Who would help me? A friend of yours?"

 "No friend of mine, but a bereaved member of her family. Next of kin to
the dearly departed Elphaba Thropp, the Wicked Witch of the West... 
 "But I thought Elphaba's sister was dead!" said Liir. "Wasn't
Nessarose--killed by Dorothy's clumsy house?"

 "Yes, she was. But didn't you know? Didn't Elphaba tell you? She had a
brother, too. A younger brother named Shell."

 4

 IN COMING TO THEIR SENSES,Sister Doctor and Sister Apothecaire were
gratified to find they still possessed their faces. The pack mules were
nowhere to be seen though, nor their food supplies, nor their hosts.

 "What is that engine in my brain?" said Sister Doctor, after she'd
vomited into some ferns.

 "I feel as if the jackal moon had been down here snouting around in an
unseemly manner." Sister Apothecaire adjusted her garments. "It must be
the effects of the ceremonial pipe."

 "And that's why the Yunamata never built a city nor invented
algebrarish nor bowed to the Wizard."

 "With a smoke that kicks like that, who needs a city or an Emperor?"

 They ambled in oppressive daylight. "I suppose we should think about
what we're doing," said Sister Doctor.

 "Yes. If the Yunamata are right, then the Scrow must be responsible for
the scrapings. So we're liable to wander into hotter water if we are
able to find them."

 "I think that's our calling, isn't it?"

 "Hmmm." They had a choice: to venture farther into the foothills of the
Kells, and make their presence known to the Scrow--or to go back and
claim they'd failed. Without discussing it further, they pressed on.
Duty weighed more heavily than dread.

 

 THE MAUNTS KNEWthat their professional skills--to be loving, to be
devout, to be local in their attentions and spiritual in their
desires--had not prepared them to be government envoys. Still, since
their mauntery served as a way station for those who acted upon the
stage of the world, the good sisters considered themselves at least as
broad-minded as any other cloistered soul.

 Sister Doctor and Sister Apothecaire, nonetheless, were unprepared for
the breadth of the Scrow camp when they came upon it. More than a
thousand clanfolk, they estimated, maybe fifteen hundred, and a virtual
zoography of physical types. The nomads tented in patterns that followed
their occupations.

 Some castes managed the animals, primarily a huge herd of sheep
collected from fell-swards to be penned for a late winter lambing. Other
castes specialized in creating sumptuous hangings and carpets from the
wool of those same sheep. A contingent of fierce-browed young men with
slender, tapering dark beards seemed to be a kind of clerks' collective,
running here and there with instructions, corrections, assessments,
revisions. Older men and women--some much older--managed the care of
children with surprising mildness and efficacy.

 At the center of the hubbub rose a tented pagoda. Around it, a good
many brass urns issued an aroma of raspberry and heart-of-musk. It
didn't take the maunts long to realize that the incense wasn't
devotional, but hospitable: the smell from the Princess's pagoda was,
well, a stench.

 First fed on a peppery broth that seemed to clear both their sinuses
and their brains, the maunts were then allowed a chance to pray and
compose themselves. It was almost dusk when they were brought into a
tent to meet an ambassador of some sort.

 "Please, sit," he told them, and sat as well. He was a portly man on
the threshold of old age. One eye wandered as if bedeviled by an
interior vision it didn't appreciate. His skin was the color of fine
whisky. "We hope you have been made comfortable. Or comfortable enough."

 The maunts nodded. Their approach had been greeted without apparent
alarm, and they'd been welcomed respectfully.

 "Very good, very good," he said. "Even in these uncongenial times, with
the Emperor cudgeling us heathen into conversion through the force of
his holy mace, we pride ourselves on clinging to our customs. Charity to
visitors ranks high among our traditions. My name is Shem Ottokos."

 "Lord Ottokos, you speak very well," ventured Sister Doctor.

 "For a Scrow, you mean," he said, taking no offense. "I had a
university degree at Shiz, back in the days when there was more
collegiality at college. I studied the languages, ancient and modern."

 "You had a notion to be a translator?"

 "My notions are insignificant. I am the chief interpreter for her
Highness now. I assume you have ventured into our tribal lands to gain
an audience with the Princess?"

 Though the maunts believed the native land of the Scrow to be
significantly farther west, on the other side of the Great Kells, theirs
wasn't to quibble. "Yes," said Sister Doctor. "We have work to complete.
We are investigating the cause and agency of the recent spate of
scrapings. If it would suit the Princess to grant us an audience, we
should be able to clear up our concerns and be on our way almost at
once. Is the Princess up to seeing us?"

 Without answering, he stood and flicked both his hands, which the
maunts took to mean:Come . They followed him from his tent and toward
the royal pavilion in the center of the camp.

 "She has not been well for more years than anyone can remember," said
Lord Ottokos as they walked. "She has little energy for idle chat and I
will not bother to translate anything that would upset her. I would
suggest you contain your remarks to ten minutes, no more. When I get up
to leave, so shall you."

 "We might have brought tribute...  murmured Sister Apothecaire.

 "Sister!"said Sister Doctor sharply. "We are maunts of the House of
Saint Glinda! We do not bring tribute to a foreign princess!"

 "I meant a cake, or a witty novel," she explained unhappily.

 "She has no need of cakes or novels," said Lord Ottokos. "Meaning no
disrespect to our Princess, I would recommend that you breathe through
your mouths. It is not considered impertinent to hold your sleeve in
front of your nose. Try not to gag, though; it upsets her Highness."

 The maunts exchanged glances.

 The interior of the pavilion was dark and dank. Even chilly, come to
that. Eight or ten heavy stone caskets with perforated lids slowly
exhaled sheets of moisture that hung, nearly visible, in the air. Ice,
thought Sister Doctor. They've carried ice down from the higher Kells,
where it lasts all year long. And the cold serves to tamp down the smell
of rot. Now that's a labor, for ice is heavy, and the higher Kells are
not convenient... rhaps that’s'why they're so far from their normal
territory at this time of year, for easier access to the ice pack up the
eastern, more gradual slope of the Kells...  Sister Apothecaire, whose eyes had adjusted more quickly to the gloom,
pinched Sister Doctor's elbow and indicated a massive mound of reeking
laundry on a low table. It was rolling on its side and opening its eyes.

 "Your Highness, may I present Sisters Lowly and Lower-even-than-that,"
said Lord Ottokos, before he remembered to speak in his own tongue.
"Ladies, the Princess Nastoya acknowledges your presence."

 She had done nothing of the sort. She had not spoken nor even so much
as blinked.

 Lord Ottokos continued. "The Princess enquires after your health,
assumes it is sufficiently robust or you wouldn't be here, and
compliments you on your courage. Have you news of Liir?"

 The maunts turned to each other, but in the darkness of the pavilion
they could scarcely read each other's expressions. "Liir?" said Sister
Apothecaire faintly. She was beginning to need her sleeve, as had been
proposed.

 "The boy who denied he was Elphaba's son. Is that not why you came to
us? To tell us of him? Where is Liir?"

 Sister Apothecaire began, "Why, that's uncanny, I never--"

 But Sister Doctor cut her off, saying "We came to discover why the
Scrow are scraping the faces of unarmed travelers."

 Lord Ottokos made his mouth into a pucker--amused, distressed, it was
hard to tell. "I repeat, have you news of Liir?" he said.

 "If you're not interpreting our comments to your senior, need we have
this conversation here?" said Sister Doctor.

 "My good Sister," said Lord Ottokos, closing his eyes briefly, as if
experiencing a spasm, "the Princess Nastoya entertains visitors only
once every several weeks. Do not waste her time. She is waiting to learn
what you have to say."

 "Wehave seen Liir, we have!" said Sister Apothecaire, unable to govern
herself any longer. "He was found not all that far from here some days
ago, and brought to our mauntery for recovery, if he can be recovered."

 "Sister!" barked Sister Doctor.

 Sister Apothecaire shot her colleague a look that seemed, vaguely, to
imply:Give it a rest .

 Lord Ottokos turned and spoke to Princess Nastoya. For the first time,
she stirred; that is, her face stirred. Beneath its greasy robes her
body had kept up a constant slow stretching, twitching, creaking. Her
eyes widened, and globes of ink-colored tears collected in the folds
beside her nose. She was a woman in mighty distress. When she spoke, the
voice was deep and plain, a laundry mistress's voice, no sonority to it.
She said only a few syllables, but the language of the Scrow must have
allowed for much meaning in enunciation and pronunciation.

 "Forgive my not getting up," began Lord Ottokos's translation. "I am
stricken, a creature severed unnaturally in two by decisions made long
ago, when the Wizard of Oz set public policy against thinking Animals.
Now, one part of my nature is nearly dead and the other clings to life
waiting help."

 "I have training in surgery, and my colleague in applications--"

 Lord Ottokos spoke over Sister Doctor. "I have entrusted the boy Liir
with a task, and I have been waiting his return these ten years. Ten
years is a decade to a woman, marking the difference between maiden and
matron, matron and crone, crone and harpy--but to an Elephant it is only
a breath. A long, foul breath, but only a breath. I know the loyalty of
Animals, I know the fickle allegiances of men. Because Liir was possibly
a flitch of Elphaba, I had placed my trust in him all these years. I
have hoped he might discover or invent a solution for my dilemma. And I
have been patient--an Elephant is patient. And you come to tell me you
have found him. Bless you, my daughters. Is he coming back to me at last?"

 "He is not well," said Sister Doctor.

 "Hewas not well," corrected Sister Apothecaire. "Perhaps he's
improving. We've been traveling, so we can't report developments in his
state."

 "Why does he not arrive?"

 "Something happened to him," said Sister Doctor. "We don't know what.
Perhaps what attacked our sister maunts attacked him, too. He is sunk in
a strange sleep from which he may not awake. If we knew what had
attacked him, we might better invent how to treat him. Lord Ottokos,ask
her my question !" she said suddenly. "It is pertinent!"

 Lord Ottokos obliged this time, and muttered something to Princess Nastoya.

 The reply. "We do not scrape the faces of maunts, nor of mice, nor
sheep. We do not treat others as we have been treated. You must hunt the
barbaric Yunamata and find out from them why they have taken against
travelers."

 "It isn't the Yunamata," said Sister Doctor, and in making the remark
out loud she suddenly felt certain about this for the first time; she
had been dubious up until now. "They wouldn't do such a thing. Can you
be sure your people are not forgetting their traditions under the burden
of sorrow they feel at your condition?"

 "My people, as you call them, are not even my people," said Princess
Nastoya. "They honored me years ago and made me their princess, and even
in my decay they will not allow me to abdicate. They are a nation that
has elevated charity beyond what is possible even in the precincts of
your religious order. If out of fealty to me they would rather be
governed by a Princess who is partly a corpse, how could they raise a
hand against defenseless travelers?"

 "The young maunts who ventured this way were intent on conversion,"
admitted Sister Doctor. "They were sent by the Emperor himself, we hear."

 "None of us admires the Emperor's zealotry. But intention to convert is
hardly a reason to kill people and defile their bodies. The murderers
you seek aren't among the Scrow. Don't waste your time considering the
matter. It is the Yunamata or it is someone else. Or something else.
Perhaps they had a disease."

 "No disease makes one's face fall off," said Sister Apothecaire firmly.

 "If you know so much, what is my disease?" said Princess Nastoya.

 "We should have to examine Your Highness," said Sister Doctor.

 "Enough," interrupted Lord Ottokos. "I won't translate such a barbaric
notion. The Princess has dismissed you. You may leave."

 But the Princess spoke over her interpreter, and he was bound to
listen. He bowed his head and continued, "She says again--and she has too
few words left to spend in life to say it a third time--where is the boy
Liir?"

 "But he is not a boy any longer. We have told you what we know." Sister
Doctor put her sleeve to her nose; in her line of work she knew the
smell of putrescence all too well. "He is in a comatose state not six or
eight days' journey from here, though perhaps nearer to the Emerald City
than you would like to venture."

 Lord Ottokos snapped, "We are not imbeciles. We know where his body is.
You have told us. That is not the question."

 The maunts blinked at him.

 "Where is he?" Lord Ottokos repeated. "Where ishe ?"

 "We don't know where he is," said Sister Apothecaire. "Our talents are
not that fine."

 Princess Nastoya shivered. Handmaidens came forward to withdraw shawls
drenched with sweat and other seepage. "Let me help," said Sister
Apothecaire suddenly.

 "Don't you dare," said Lord Ottokos.

 "I do dare. What are you going to do, have me scraped? Sister Doctor, a
vessel of water and some essence of citron--lemons, limoncelli,
parsleyfruit, anything. And some vinegar reduced to the usual."

 Princess Nastoya began to weep then, full tears of a nasty vintage.
They fell on Sister Apothecaire's bare hands and burned them; she was
not halted in her work. "What has she said just then, in that low
murmur?" she asked Lord Ottokos, who stood sputtering and clutching his
beard in rage and disbelief.

 Finally he submitted to this dotty, disobedient woman. "She said she
wishes she could be scraped," he finally allowed.

 "We can't do that," said Sister Apothecaire. "Vows of gentility and all
that. But she can be made more comfortable. Sister Doctor, that pillow.
The head. Watch the neck. What a weight upon this spine! Whereis the
dratted vinegar reduction?"

 5

 FOR A MOMENT, TO REST HER HANDS,Candle set the domingon down. The sound
box thunked with a hollow expression. Its cavity was a kind of womb, she
thought; how ineffable the secrets born there.

 She wasn't given to reflection herself, but she was tired. For a moment
she allowed herself to remember her arrival here a month or so before.
The one called Mother Yackle had been dozing on a bench in the sunlight;
she'd looked up with a start at Candle's approach. She had stretched out
a wilted hand, peering with an expression canny, severe, and resigned.
Resigned: that was much the way Candle had felt at that moment. Her
uncle had tricked her here; he hadn't wanted to keep her any longer.
"The way you're going, you'll be pregnant soon enough, if you're not
already--and I can't take a child and a child's newborn with me on the
road." It seemed he'd bought the domingon from its maker as a way to
bargain with her. Go into the mauntery for a year, and the instrument is
yours. Do with it what you will, and I'll be back to get you in good
time. There's not much left for us in our home marshes, but you'd be
ruined in the north. They'd spit at you, your easy ways; they'd laugh,
your little voice. Stay here, and remember me wherever I am.

 That kind of remembering was another skill, but now she was attending
someone else, and her uncle meant little to her.

 Candle took Liir's hand in her own. A clamminess. Was his color fading?
Or was it just that the sun was setting, and the jackal moon was rising
later than it had? The shadows lengthened and browned. By comparison his
skin was bleached like an old, sun-whitened bone.

 She took up her instrument again and leaned the edge of the minor
bridge right on the edge of his bed. Her fingers running into the treble
range, they danced in contrapuntal jiggery at the top register, not six
inches from his right ear.

 Wherewas he?

 

 LADYGLINDA SAID TOLIIR,"I can tell you have no intention of leaving
that charred broomstick behind, but if you try to walk into a public
space carrying it over your shoulder like a blunderbuss you'll be taken
for a fool, or at any rate noticed. I think what you are after is
something a little more like camouflage."

 She paused to regard herself in a convenient looking glass in the
stairwell. Adjusting her everyday tiara, she conceded, "It must be said
that camouflage is not an effect I have ever strived to master. Still,
we'll do what we can."

 Liir followed her down the marble steps of the central staircase. The
place had gone quiet. "Goodness, everyone takes off for a smoke the
minute my back is turned," she said. "Where are the kitchens, anyway?
Through here?"

 She stumbled into a cloakroom, and then opened the door to a closet
where two of the belowstairs staff were involved in recreational
exercises. "I beg your pardon," she said, and shut the door, and then
locked it. "Eventually they'll have to thump to be released, and one of
them is bound to be cheating. Heaps of fun. But where's the kitchen?"

 "Have you just moved here?" asked Liir.

 "Don't be silly. Lord Chuffrey had this place long before we married.
But I don't cook for myself, if that's what you mean. Nothing other than
the toast that I mentioned earlier, and that's done in the breakfast
hall. Ah, here we are."

 A half-flight of stone steps descended into a cavernous whitewashed
kitchen. A dozen members of the staff were sitting about the table so
deep in conversation that they didn't hear her coming. "Lady Glinda,"
said a bootblack, and they all leaped up with guilty looks.

 "Glad to be recognized in my own home," said Glinda. "I hate to
interrupt what are probably well-intentioned plans to kill us all in our
beds, but if you don't mind? A minor request for whichever of you has
just a moment to spare?"

 They melted away, all but the housekeeper and the houseboy.

 "He's about the same size as the bootblack," said Glinda, pointing to
Liir. "Suit him up in House of Chuffrey colors and find some decent
shoes, and get him a leather satchel on a sling. You know, that long
cylindrical thingy that Lord Chuffrey's guests use to carry their arrows
when they go hunting in the country. That ought to accommodate the
filthy old broom, I think."

 "Asking your pardon, Lady Glinda," said the houseboy. "We've no such
satchels on the town premises. They're all down to Mockbeggar Hall."

 "Do I have to think of everything? Haven't we friends? Haven't we
neighbors to borrow from? Aren't there shops still serving the public?
Need I go tramping to the marketplace myself with a sack of coins
between my teeth?"

 The houseboy fled. The housekeeper pursed her lips editorially.

 "Don't speak. Don't. It's only a temporary appointment," said Lady
Glinda. "Just for the day, in fact. Now feed up this boy; he hasn't had
a square meal for weeks, I can tell. And when he's equipped as I
require, return him to the Yellow Parlor."

 Lady Glinda climbed the stairs, muttering "Kitchens!" in disbelief,
leaving Liir behind.

 "Well, peel off those beggar's weeds and wash in the cauldron room,
just there; I won't have you staining her fancyfart's good livery with
your dirty limbs," said the housekeeper. "I'll put out some food, and
you be grateful for it, for it's out of our own downstairs supply, and
we don't take kindly to ravenous upstarts here in Lord Chuffrey's
establishment."

 

 "WHERE ARE WE GOING?"He peered out the window of the carriage.

 "Put your head back. Servants don't gawp out of carriage windows."

 How odd to be five feet higher than the street. It was not an
experience to which he was accustomed. The carriage lurched under arched
spans of stone, stopped for a squadron of uniformed cavalry on display,
sidelined along a merchants' parade, and picked up speed along Dirt
Boulevard. Cleared of its village of indigents, the roadway showed signs
of its original elegance, though its parallel rows of trees were in bad
shape. It looked as if the grounds were being used for military drills.

 Where had all the itinerants gone? "Whereare we going?"

 "To the Palace," Glinda said. "Where you'll keep your head down and
your mouth closed. Are you scared?"

 It seemed too personal a question for a woman to ask a boy. Perhaps she
realized this. She continued, "I was, the first time I came here. It was
with Elphaba. We were older than you are now, but only by a few years.
And in many ways we were more naive. Well, I was, anyway. And I was
terrified. The wonderful Wizard of Oz! My stomach just about dissolved
in its own acids."

 "What happened?"

 "What happened?" She turned the question to herself, examining it.
"History happened, I suppose. We saw the Wizard, and we parted
ways--Elphaba went underground, as it were, and...  time, I hugged the
limelight." She sighed. "With the best of intentions, and with limited
success."

 "And now?" he said, not because he was interested, but because he
didn't want any more attention on himself.

 "Now, I hold the key," she said. "Now, for the time being, I am
intended to stand in for the mighty on their thrones. It's all I'm good
for."

 "Are the mighty deserving of thrones?"

 "That's an Elphaba question, and out of your youthful pouting mouth it
sounds preposterous. Like most of her superior cavils, it has no easy
answer. How could I know?"

 She sighed. "Sitback, I said. Yes, I'm nervous. You'll find in time
most people are. They simply learn better how to disguise it, and
sometimes, if they're wise, how to use their anxiety to serve the public
good. Perhaps being jittery helps me pay closer attention. You know, I
didn't want the hard work of government. They all say I need to clean
house. Clean house! That presumes I've cleaned a house before. I say,
hey, what are the servants for? Decoration?"

 She was speaking to herself, in a way, but she was also trying to cheer
him up. He turned his head, confused by her kindness, and busied himself
from watching, at an acceptable angle, as the buildings nearer the
Palace hove into view. One mammoth ministry was strapped with bas-relief
marble panels depicting various historic Ozmas in characteristic poses.
They looked at once venerable and ludicrous, and the pigeons of the
Emerald City paid them no high compliment.

 "But why are we going to the Wizard's Palace?"

 "The people's Palace, now," said Glinda derisively. "Though what the
people are going to do with their own palace I have no earthly idea."
She chewed on a nail. "There's a clandestine entrance to Southstairs
from the Palace. Of course there had to be, a means of instantly
spiriting away any treasonous Palace upstart sniffed out in the court.
Though the common criminal condemned to serve time is more publicly
lowered in a cage into the pit that drops down inside those bulwarky
ramparts. You see, it's mostly underground, Southstairs. It's the most
impregnable prison in Oz. Nobody who goes in via the cage comes out that
way."

 "How do they come out?"

 "In pine coffins."

 

 SHE DABBED A SACHETdoused with oil of clove and root-of-persimmon
behind her ears. By the time the door to her carriage was opened by a
staff member of the Palace, Lady Glinda had become more regal. Her chin
went up, a jeweled scepter was provided for her right hand. Her eye
flashed with a steeliness Liir had not noted earlier.

 "Lady Glinda," they murmured. She deigned to supply the briefest of
nods, as an indication that she was not deaf, and walked by.

 Liir followed in something closer to terror than he had ever
experienced before. He expected to be rushed away and beaten before he
could even begin to protest. But Lady Glinda's penumbra of influence
extended eight feet behind her, it seemed, for his progress was
unquestioned, and he gained the threshold of the Palace without anyone's
objecting.

 The place was a maze, and he lost his bearings almost at once.
Accompanied by a Palace flunky, Glinda and Liir swept up grand
staircases, along arched corridors, past ceremonial chambers and
receiving parlors. Another staircase or two, another corridor or three,
and at length they traversed a long dingy room, where dozens of staff
members were perched on high stools above ledgers. They splashed ink in
their nervous abjection, though not on Glinda in her celestial blue gown.

 Behind a wall with an interior window, the better for supervising
workers, stood an office with a desk and some chairs. An elegant man
absorbed in a newssheet was tipped back on the hind legs of his chair,
his ceremonial boots propped on the desk and his saber stuck in the soil
of a potted fern. "Commander," said Lady Glinda, "we're here. Show some
respect, or pretend to anyway."

 He leaped to his feet with ostentatious speed. Liir blinked and gaped.
"Commander Cherrystone!" he said.

 "You've met?" said Glinda. "How droll."

 "I'm drawing a blank," said the Commander, wrinkling a brow.

 "At Kiamo Ko," said Liir. "You were head of the Gale Forcers at Red
Windmill. It was your men that kidnapped Fiyero's widow, Sarima, and her
sisters and her children."

 Commander Cherrystone smiled deferentially and offered Liir a hand.
"Kidnapped? We took them into protective custody for their own good. How
were they to know the depravity of the Witch they were harboring?"

 "And how well did you protect them?" said Liir.

 "Ooh, the boy has spit, has he," said Commander Cherrystone, wiping his
sleeve. "I like that, son, but please. This is my best dress uniform."
He was equable and seemed to take no offense.

 Liir glared at Glinda. "You've taken me here, to him--betrayed me to the
very man responsible for Nor's abduction?"

 "Recriminations, they get us nowhere," said Lady Glinda. "And how was I
to know? Consider it poetic justice: Now he must help you. Because I say
so." She turned to Cherrystone. "Look, Commander, I've laid it all out.
You got my note? The boy wants to see Fiyero's daughter, if she's still
alive. As an officer and a governor of the prison, you can make the
arrangements, can't you?"

 "It's an institution with its own appetite, is a prison," said
Commander Cherrystone. Rather approvingly, thought Liir. "I can't say I
remember you, lad, but my work involves many postings. And in none of
them have I ever before met a soul who wanted to enter Southstairs
voluntarily. You understand: No promises that you will leave it. Either
dead or alive. It might be your tomb."

 "My name is Liir," he said. He tried to lift his chin as he had seen
Glinda do. "Wehave met. I liked you. You seemed decent."

 "I tried to be decent, within reason," he replied. "Anyway, I had
little choice if I wanted to gain the trust of that knotty little clan
in Kiamo Ko."

 "What happened to Sarima?" asked Liir. "Fiyero's widow."

 "Everyone dies. It's a question of where and how, that's all."

 "Oh, bandying, bandying, please, my head," said Glinda. "I feel I'm
back at Shiz. The Debating Tourneys: what a migraine. I need a tonic.
Are you going to do this for me, Commander?"

 "I wouldn't be here if you didn't require it," he answered. "Ready, lad?"

 "I'm ready," Liir answered. He turned to Glinda. "Ought I take off
these silly clothes?"

 "What, and go naked into Southstairs? I wouldn't recommend it," said
Commander Cherrystone. Glinda waved dismissively. Then she tucked her
hand against her mouth and bit her knuckles. It was hard to know if her
pretty ways were studied or innate.

 "Oh, oh," she managed, "I don't know that I'll see you again... d you
remind me so of her."

 "I haven't Elphaba's talent," said Liir simply. "I'm not worth
mourning, believe me."

 "Her power was only part of it," said Glinda. "She was brave, and so
are you."

 "Bravery can be learned," he said, trying to be consoling.

 "Bravery can be stupid," said Commander Cherrystone. "Believe me."

 The boy didn't move forward to touch her or kiss her. In Kiamo Ko, only
Nanny had been the kissing type, and Liir hadn't figured much in her
affections. So he merely said, "Well, good-bye, then. And don't worry.
I'll take care."

 They looked at one another. In a moment Liir would lose heart; he would
do the shaming thing that the houseboy had predicted. He would let Nor's
life reach its destiny without intervening--in exchange for having
someone stand in as a mother. Lord knows Elphaba hardly had!--and here
was Glinda, blinking back tears or something.

 She looked at him almost as if thinking the same thing. The moment
passed, though. "You do your work," Lady Glinda told him. "Ozspeed. And
don't forget your broom."

 "Her broom," said Liir.

 "Your broom," she corrected him.

 6

 THE ROOM GREW SUDDENLY COLDER.Night was drawing in, and the rump flank
of the wind hinted at the winter to come. Candle rose to draw the
shutters closed. The jackal moon was at its most self-satisfied; soon
the constellation would wane and its elements return to their ordinary,
lonelier orbits.

 She shuttered most of the windows for the first time, but she couldn't
fix one shutter securely; a rope of ivy with a stem stout as a forearm
had grown across a corner. Candle took an extra sheet and hung it as
best she could against the chill.

 When she came back to Liir, she became alarmed. She felt his brow. His
skin was colder still, and his blood pressure seemed to be dropping.

 She wasn't suited for work of this seriousness. She laid down her
instrument on the floor, determined to run and get Sister Cook or the
Superior Maunt. She found her way blocked.

 The figure stood in the doorway, veil drawn to cloak the features.
Candle reared back, startled.

 The veil dropped. It was only the addled elderly maunt, the senior
biddy in the place, the one known as Mother Yackle. What was she doing here?

 "You can't leave," said Mother Yackle. "There's no one else here to do
what needs to be done."

 Candle picked up her domingon and raised it threateningly. Quicker than
could have been imagined, Mother Yackle slid back into the shadows, and
closed the door behind her, and locked it.

 Candle thumped against the door, and threw her shoulder against it, but
the heavy thing was quarter-sawn oakhair wood, and cross-built. She
couldn't waste her time clawing at it with her fingernails. Liir was
failing.

 She turned her attentions to the rest of the room. Not raised in the
arts of medicine, she didn't recognize much of what she found in the
cupboard. A large mortar and pestle for the grinding of herbs. Several
fresh-nibbed pens, with sheets of paper and a stoppered jug of ink, for
the making of notes. Unguents of disagreeable viscosities. The body of a
mouse on the bottom shelf. A few old keys--none of which fit the room's
only keyhole.

 She sat down and played a few rapid runnels, in mischief mode, to
concentrate her apprehensions. She felt for his pulse again, and brushed
his hair away from his forehead. Even his scalp was cold.

 She took off her tunic and tried to wave it from the window. Though she
couldn't attract attention by yelling, maybe someone in the kitchen
garden would see her signal. But a wind came up and took the tunic away,
and that was that.

 At length she relied on what fate had provided her. She took the
cleanest of the pen nibs and sharpened it further by training it along
the stone windowsill. Releasing Liir's left arm from its splint, she
propped it up against a transept of the domingon, so his hand was raised
in the air, a salute. To the extent that she prayed--which wasn't much,
even in these environs, even at this drastic juncture--she begged for her
hands to be steady. Then she tried to play Liir's bicep as she might her
domingon, running her hands in light, feathery scales along the skin.
She settled on a place near the inside of the elbow, and using the nib
as a lancet, made a neat incision.

 She caught his blood in the mortar, and when she'd filled it she rushed
to the window and dumped it out. There, jackal moon, you want your blood
offering, there it is. She collected a second portion, then a third, and
she took off her habit to bind Liir's arm and stop the flow.

 In only her broadcloth shift she shivered, and her fingers trembled.
Nonetheless she returned to her instrument. Her musical figures went
wobbly, but she kept on.

 

 AFTERGLINDA HAD GONE,Commander Cherrystone took no more notice of Liir
than he might a napping dog. He disappeared behind his newspapers,
humming to himself. Liir sat on a stool, waiting; something had to
happen sooner or later. He watched the Commander's well-trimmed nails
hold the page, listened to various admonitory hums and clicks and
editorialhumphs breathed nasally. The career soldier was a fit man, a
calm one, and his lack of attention to Liir seemed suitable. What was
hard to fathom was the Commander's composure. It was under his command
that Nor and her family had been abducted, yet he seemed so oblivious to
Liir's contempt that Liir began to doubt himself. Maybe there was more
to the ruling family of Kiamo Ko than he had known.

 Not until the business day in the Palace came to an end, and the dozens
of civil servants left their desks for home, did the Commander sit up.
"Your guide will be along presently--ah, there he is."

 A handsome younger man with a keen, guarded expression blustered into
the room. "Can't have kept you waiting more than a tockety-tick, have I?
Witches' britches, the Palace staff gives you the once-over! Thought
things would loosen up once the Wizard abdicated." He shucked a jacket
from his shoulders and slung it across the desk. "You notice. Nice, eh?
A clothier in Brickle Lane. Yes, it's black-market Munchkinsheep wool,
I'd have nothing else. Feel that weight."

 "You've a prettier penny to spend than a military man does," observed
the Commander dryly.

 "She is not that young and I am not that choosy: conditions for a
bargain. Bartered it mostly. Fuck, I'm hungry. This is the boy, then.
Got a crumpet or a butter roll anywhere, Cherryvery?"

 "This is Liir. You're to take him below and help him as best you can. I
know you've your mind on other matters, so I don't pretend to expect you
will be thorough in your assistance. But do try. He seems a good sort."

 The young man shot Liir a glance. "He looks too wet to be after what
I'm after down there."

 "I suspect he is," said Commander Cherrystone, "but all good things
come to those who wait, and he may grow into a sexual nature before he
emerges, if he ever does. Liir, this is Shell."

 "The Witch's brother?" Liir felt he had to check.

 "The same," said Shell, flexing his fingers. Liir wasn't sure that he
could see a resemblance, but Shell looked capable and cunning both. "Are
you ready?"

 Does he know who I am, wondered Liir. Has Shell ever heard of a Liir? A
boy who might be his nephew?

 "I'm ready."

 Commander Cherrystone flicked a speck of dust off his dress weskit.
"The usual arrangements about your return, Shell. Liir--I wish you luck."

 He left, locking them into the office. Shell looked at Liir more
closely, and his nose twitched as if on the scent of something. Then he
shrugged and said, "I'm ready for an ale. You ready for Southstairs?"
Liir nodded.

 Shell went to an installation of cubbies for the sorting of interoffice
mail. Liir couldn't see how his fingers fussed, nor at what, but in a
moment the whole wooden unit slid aside on a secret track. Behind, a
plain door, and Shell had the key for it.

 "Is this where Southstairs got its name?" asked Liir, pointing to the
flight of timber steps that descended treacherously, without benefit of
railings, into the gloom.

 "Dunno. Never thought about it. Let's go. I hope your thighs are good.
Watch your step."

 "Was your sister a martyr?" asked Liir, innocently as he could.

 "Which sister?" he answered, but before Liir could reply, he continued.
"Martyrdom implies a religious faith, and Nessarose had so much faith
that no one else in the family could breathe. Elphaba affected a salty
agnosticism; I never knew whether it was genuine or not. For me to
consider them martyrs, I'd have to have faith, and I don't--not in
unionism, the faith of my father; nor in the other varieties that clot
the calendar with their hobbledehoy feast days. It took all the fancy
dancing I could do not to be tarred as a traitor-by-family-association.
Luckily, I have little interest in government, and I'm rather good at
dancing, as it happens. Look... ir, is it... prefer to save my breath.
Shall we not chatter like choirgirls on an outing? That okay with you?"

 Liir didn't answer. The wind siphoning through the slitted windows
above made a sound almost like a spiral of music. He wanted to ask Shell
if he could hear the strange effect, but he kept his own counsel.

 They grew colder and colder as they descended. Soon Liir had to put out
a hand, not just to feel his way in the gloom, but also because his legs
threatened to buckle beneath him. The wall was damp, here and there soft
with wet clinging growth.

 Eventually the sound of their steps began to echo, and then it was
clear a light was burning below. At last they reached a stone floor from
which several dark corridors led.

 "Here I usually stretch," said Shell, and showed Liir how. Liir rubbed
his muscles as directed. When they were ready, Shell took a club from a
pile on the floor and lit it from the torch affixed to the wall. "Do the
same; we won't spend the rest of eternity together, you know," he said.
"Light is helpful. These are limbs of irongrowth stock, so they burn a
good long time."

 "If we're not going to stick together, how will I find my way out?"

 "I don't know. I assume you're clever, though." Shell's nonchalance was
cruel. "Very few emerge from here. Only the guards."

 Liir tried to memorize all of everything, just in case--but he intended
to stick with his guide no matter what Shell might think about it.

 The way was dank and sour, sometimes cut with a sulfurous gust. The
torchlight made a tidal rush against flattened arches of milk grey
stone. Parts of the walls were bricked, though the work was ancient and
the brick face crumbling.

 As they walked along the crushed cement and scattered rubble, and Liir
got his breath back, he tried to think of how to speak to Shell. The man
was in his late twenties, maybe early thirties, and a certain class of
fop; even Liir, knowing himself a rube and a naïf, could see that. But
Shell's eye was keen and his manner, variously courtly or casual, always
suave. He was taller than Elphaba had been, sleek where she had been spiky.

 As it happened, Liir had no time to ask questions. The path ended in a
flight of shallow steps leading farther down. They were reaching the
outskirts of Southstairs--not so much a prison as an underground city.
The sounds of carts, and a murmur of voices. Somewhere, someone was
playing a stringed instrument, far away; somewhere, someone must be
cooking, for there was a grievous smell of rendered bacon fat on a hot
griddle.

 "The cowhand of mercy prepares his rounds." Shell swept off his hat and
left it on a ledge; a curl of yellow plume bobbed in the gloom.

 "Will you lead me to Nor?"

 "I've promised to take you to the central registrar, but I've a few
stops to make first." Shell patted the satchel on his shoulder. "Some
folks need my attention, and it would be unthinkable to postpone their
medications to rush you by first. You don't mind?"

 Liir did. "No, of course not."

 Around another corner, down a few more steps, and they came to a greasy
waterway, not unlike the canals above in the Emerald City. "Come on
then, if you're coming," said Shell, leaping aboard an abandoned canal
dory. He seemed to be growing cheerier by the moment.

 At length, the narrow waterway ran into a wider channel that curved
beneath a high ceiling of rock face supported here and there with beams
and buttresses. On either side of the channel, padlocked doors were set
flush into the stone walls. Sometimes the doors gave out onto ledges or
a path between cells; more often, just onto the water.

 The stench and the noise grew. Before long Liir and Shell passed
grey-clothed laborers hauling buckets of supper one way, buckets of
feces back.

 "Didn't think a country kid would wrinkle his nose at a rural perfume,"
observed Shell, berthing the canal dory. "You'll stay and guard this;
more than once I've had my vessel nabbed while I was at my errand of
mercy." He opened the flap of his satchel and removed a small glass
syringe filled with a urine-colored solution. He wiped the needle with a
clean cloth and then tapped the plunger once to make sure it worked.
"Ripe and ready, she is," he murmured. He looked sideways at Liir. "It's
humbling to be able to help those who suffer."

 With a practiced hand, he quickly undid the lock on a door and slid
through, closing it behind him.

 Despite his intentions to cling to Shell like a burr, Liir didn't have
the nerve to follow, nor was he tall enough to peer through the small
window high in the door. But there was a gap at the bottom between the
door and its sill. By sinking to the floor of the dory, Liir could make
out the movement of figures inside. Apparently Shell had set his torch
in a wall stanchion. His voice sounded soothing, even hypnotic, but the
prisoner crouching against a back wall scooched her bare feet underneath
her skirts. Shell's boots drew near until he was standing flush against
her. She moaned or whimpered, and her feet curled the farther under her
skirts. Mercy was hard to accept, Liir guessed. Shell's feet rocked from
toe to heel, with a comforting rhythm, and his heels began to lift from
the floor.

 At the sound of someone approaching, Liir turned.

 "You, what're you lying there for?" A portly Ape with a ring of keys,
dragging his knuckles on the ground. He was wreathed in his own weather
of cheap cologne, protection against the smells, and he wore a collar
made of mangy ocelot fur.

 "I'm visiting," said Liir. "With permission of Lady Glinda. I'm
accompanying a man named Shell, who is inside tending to the needs of
the sick."

 "I'll say he is, and he's sicker than most," said the Ape. "But what
Lady Glinda dictates means nothing down here; we're our own society.
Have you a writ of passage from the Under-mayor?"

 "We're on our way to get one. But Shell needed to stop first."

 "He sees to his needs. I'll see to yours. Come with me."

 "I don't think I'd better."

 The Ape insisted, and Liir called out repeatedly for Shell, who
emerged, cross and agitated. "What're you bothering my boy for?"

 "Oh, he's yourboy ?" asked the Ape. "Ever the surprise, Shell."

 "He's under my care for the moment. Leave him be, Tunkle."

 "You give our Miss Serenity her weekly jab?" asked Tunkle, jingling the
keys.

 Shell replaced the syringe. "You interrupted me. I'll go on to the next."

 "He's a one-man festival of fun," said Tunkle. "I wouldn't get too
close if I were you. He gets fairly hot and bothered over all these
errands of mercy."

 Shell showed no sign of taking offense. "Clear off, Tunkle. We know the
ropes. We're on our way to the Under-mayor. We'll just take our time,
that's all. You want a lift?"

 "Not on your life. I go upside once a month and I can find my own fun,
Master Shell; I don't need your fancy imported sort." The Ape spit in
the waterway and let them go by. "Watch your back, lad."

 Making no effort to lower his tone, Shell remarked to Liir, "Tunkle. A
collaborationist. Saved his own hide, during the Wizard's campaigns, by
signing on to bully his own." Still, his tone was neutral, as if this
seemed a reasonable enough strategy.

 Liir asked softly, "How far are we from the Under-mayor's office?"

 "A stop or two, or three," said Shell. "There's more than one would
like my attentions, but I pick and choose, trying to be fair. I can't be
all things to all people, now, can I?" He brushed his lapel and made
ready to continue his missionary work.

 

 LIIR DIDN'T KNOWhow much time had passed before they finally reached
the Under-mayor's quarters, but Southstairs grew progressively warmer,
stinkier, noisier, brighter the farther in they floated. Shell made two
or three more stops, always, it seemed, to tend to young women--Liir
could hear their voices, supplicating, sometimes weeping, once cursing
Shell. But Liir couldn't see them, nor did he want to.

 Shell became more distracted as the hour passed, his bespoke clothes
more disheveled. At length, however, they reached their destination. A
foreman's cabin stood freely beneath the lofty ceiling from which, in
the stronger light, Liir could make out rock structures, strange
candelabras of dripped stone frozen in place.

 The prison Under-mayor was a sallow man, skin soft and pale as bleached
linen. He looked as if he hadn't seen the sun in many years. Multiple
rings on every finger, even his thumbs: like a fence for stolen jewels.
His name was Chyde. "You're raising someone up in the paths of
righteousness, I see," he said, cheerily enough, to Shell. "I'm not used
to thinking of you as concerned about the morals of the young."

 "One does what one can," said Shell.

 "I thought your motto was one does whom one can. But never mind that.
You bring news of the starlight goddess?"

 "Glinda's all right. She's coping. The City's a mess up there, but
you'll have heard all about it."

 "You always have a special slant, though." Chyde located some beer and
a few stale rings of fried castipod. Liir declined, but Shell tucked in.

 "Well, after all these years, it's a right rich stew up there, that's
for sure," Shell conceded through a mouthful of flaky breading. "The
Wizard's departure was weirdly unexpected, given he's been in power for
so long. Still, with so many having schemed behind the scenes to oust
him, you'd think they'd have gotten their signals straight about what
ought to happen next. Lady Glinda is looking in, a glamorous figurehead,
and no one knows if she's got a scrap of brain in her noggin. The trade
unions should be rising any day, but the municipal militia wasn't quite
prepared to recognize a socialite for a queen. Hence, in loyal support
ofcourse, the guard has been on the offensive, clearing out the
neighborhoods where the rabble is more likely to rouse. Glinda thinks
it's urban revitalization. So it's an interesting time, a sweep of
forces with everyone assessing the power of the other. Heads will roll,
of course. It's merely a question of in what sequence: who gets to laugh
first, and who next, and whose laugh is cut off by the guillotine blade."

 "And you'll be stealing in and out of the bedchambers of the wenches
and the wives and the widows... 
 "The wives laugh neither first nor last, but they do laugh best!"

 "I live a quiet life down here," said Under-mayor Chyde to Liir. "It's
part of your dad's program of good works to fill me in on the local
gossip. I could go northstairs if I could trust a soul, but I don't
trust a soul. And the minute the selfish bastards up there remember
their relatives down here, if they ever do, I'll be hamstrung before
morning and bled by noontime. I've never felt I could leave my post, but
especially not now. Not if I want to survive through these interesting
times."

 "He's not my father," said Liir coldly.

 "Oh? I thought I caught a resemblance," said Under-mayor Chyde. "Well,
more's the pity. You're training an apprentice, are you, Shell?"

 Shell yawned and drained his beer. "No. I promised Lady Glinda I'd
deliver this spawnling to you. He's searching for a prisoner."

 "We're all searching for someone," said Under-mayor Chyde in a drawl.
"People pay me well to begin searches I can't somehow ever manage to
complete." He flashed his jeweled hands. "Care to make a contribution to
the exhibit, lad?"

 "He's not buying your silence or your service," snapped Shell. "Get on
with it, Chyde-ey, or I'll report your side business to the authorities.
Lady Glinda has an interest in jewels herself, as it happens. A more
seemly interest. She might not like to hear--"

 "Name?" interrupted Chyde.

 "Her name was Nor," said Liir. "Is Nor. About, oh, sixteen? She was
abducted by the Gale Forcers at the castle of Kiamo Ko, out west. In the
Vinkus."

 "I can't say the name sounds familiar, but we house an exclusive
clientele, some of whom like to keep a low profile. We respect their
wishes, of course."

 "Her father was the prince of the Arjikis."

 "A crowned head? Well, if she's here, she must have one of the private
suites. You haven't been to offer her your particular brand of solace,
Shell?" Under-mayor Chyde snapped his fingers with a clink and said,
"Jibbidee, bring me the two green ledgers. No, sorry, the ocher ones, if
she's a Winkie."

 "She'd be young still," said Shell. "Or young-ish. I do have some
standards, Chyde."

 An elf with ears in an advanced state of decomposition appeared from a
cupboard and scrambled about a rickety bookshelf. "Thank you, Jibbidee,"
said Chyde, without inflection, and the elf returned to his cupboard and
shut the door behind him when his job was done.

 "You might remember the circumstances of her registering," said Shell.
"It was the same castle where my sister lived until recently."

 "Oh,that Kiamo Ko. How could I be so slow?" Chyde slid a pair of
spectacles off his pate and down to his nose, and squinted. "My former
wife, save her blessed hide, always said that I'm such a big-hearted
guy, you know, everyone's story gets to me, and so I can't keep them
straight. My heart bleeds for all. One and all."Harumph . "Part of our
marital problems, but so be it."

 He glanced up over the top of his lenses and fastened on Shell for the
first time. "I am sorry about your sisters, though, Shell. Both of them
meeting their ends within such a short time. It can't be easy."

 "We weren't close," said Shell, studying his nails.

 "Munchkinland's in revolt, now that Nessarose is dead. It has to be
said she ruled with an iron fist, for all her piety."

 "Spare us the civics class. I'm in a hurry, Chyde," said Shell. "Can I
leave the boy here for you to finish with?"

 "Some poor widowling just aching for your attention, I know, I know... 
 Liir put it together at last. What a dolt am I! "Are you sleeping with
your patients?" he blurted out. "I mean--you know--"

 "Patients," mused Chyde. "Nice touch."

 "I am seeing to their needs," said Shell, without apology or shame. He
patted the satchel. "The comfort I supply is greatly appreciated. And of
course they want to show their gratitude. What else does a lady in
chains have to offer? She couldn't accept charity. It isn't done in
polite circles. So she pays as she can. I'm not so cold as to deny them
the chance to show their appreciation. It seems a fair exchange to me."

 I'm not sticking with him even if he is my maybe-uncle. Forget it. New
plan needed. I'll improvise. "You're disgusting," said Liir. "I mean,
really. That's disgusting. You're disgusting. I can't believe it.
It's--it's monstrous."

 "Oh, I'd need to be a good sight more ambitious to make it to
monstrous." Shell laughed. "Chyde? Sometime this week would be nice."

 "Might as well leave him." Chyde turned to another volume. "Nothing is
coming to light. Are you sure she's here?"

 "I'm not sure of anything, but this is the natural first place to
start, I suppose," said Shell. He stood and smoothed down his clothes,
and offered his hand to Liir. "So we take our parting now, comrade. I
hope the rest of your day is as amusing."

 Liir thought about biting the hand, but Shell would only make another
joke. So the boy tucked his own hands high up in his armpits. "We'll
meet again," said Shell. "Likely it'll be down here, since it isn't easy
to obtain an exit visa. Sweet dreams, Liir-boy."

 He spun on his heel and disappeared almost at a run.

 "Oh, the energy of the young," said Chyde, sighing and continuing to
flip pages. "You know, I'm not coming up with anything so far. What did
you say her name was again?"

 7

 IN THE WESTERNDISAPPOINTMENTS,on the last evening of this jackal moon,
the Scrow herders sent their dogs out to round up the sheep earlier than
usual. Other workers erected a double row of pliant, bindweed fencing
around the far edge of the fold's perimeter. Unless cloud cover
prevented it, the celestial beast would brighten the night more
brilliantly than at any other time in a generation. It would make a good
night for scavengers.

 Sister Doctor and Sister Apothecaire had done what they could. They had
provided comfort to the old Princess that her own staff could not. She
was happier, though the mood in her tent, when she was asleep, was ugly.
The Scrow were a proud people--well, what people weren't?--and they were
suspicious of foreign clinical practices.

 The interpreter put it to the women as gently as he could.

 "You should move on," said Lord Shem Ottokos. "We have told you what
you came to learn--that we know nothing of the scrapings of those
colleagues of yours. If your profession is the extension of charity, you
have performed your mission. You've benefited Princess Nastoya mightily.
There is no reason to linger, and danger to you if you do."

 "We're told you are hospitable to strangers," Sister Doctor reminded him.

 "Strangers, yes; that is the way of the Scrow," said Ottokos. "After
several days, you are less strange than you once were. You become
familiar, and therefore, like family, less agreeable. I'll be happy to
provide you with a supply of food, but I recommend that you start home
this very evening and take advantage of this unusually bright night."

 Sister Doctor said, "In the question of scrapings, we haven't convinced
you that the Yunamata are blameless. So why would you send us into danger?"

 "You've been so good; we'll provide what we can manage by way of an
escort," said Lord Ottokos, and left.

 "The nerve!" said Sister Apothecaire. "We're being disinvited. I
believe I'm offended."

 "Are you going native?" Sister Doctor asked her Munchkin colleague. The
tone verged on the cruel.

 "They're adorable heathen," said Sister Apothecaire, somewhat wildly.

 "Yes. Well, they'll seem less adorable if they conquer their aversion
to scraping the faces of their visitors. After all, when you were a
child you were an adorable heathen, too, but you got over it."

 "I don't appreciate your wit, Sister Doctor."

 It began to seem for a short while as if the maunts might disobey the
instructions of their superior and split up. However, the Princess
Nastoya requested a final interview with them, and she felt well enough
to sit up on her pallet.

 "Have you taken the full measure of my ailment?" she said, through Shem
Ottokos. "To avoid the pogroms of the Wizard against the Animals, I went
deeply underground many years ago, accepting a witch's charm as a way to
hide myself. I am an Elephant, and want to go to my death as an
Elephant, but I am cursed to remain in this human body. I used to be
able to change for a brief time, but infirmity and age have eroded those
talents, and now I am trapped. I fear the Elephant within me has been
dying for some time, and may be in part dead already; but I would join
it, if I could only have help. Ten years ago I asked the Witch's boy for
help, but he disappeared. Now through your exotic skills you have helped
me rally, and so I must press this request. Please return to your hive
and collect the boy, the man, Liir. Bring him here or send him here; get
him here safely. He may not be able to help me, but even the most
blessed of witchcraft has gone underground in these trying times, and he
is the only one I know who might be able to help."

 "Do you really think he is Elphaba's son?" asked Sister Doctor.

 "He had her cape, he had her broom," said Princess Nastoya. "Maybe he
wasn't her son, but he cared about her life, and he may have learned
something anyway. What other course can I take?"

 "We've never even seen him awake," admitted Sister Apothecaire. "It
would be hard to promise we could persuade him when we don't know what
he's really like. Yet."

 "In return for his help, I'd promised him something in exchange." She
began to wheeze a bit, and Ottokos collected her phrases haltingly. "I
want--to tell him what I've heard--about--the word on the street in the
Emerald City."

 "I'm sure he'll be fascinated," said Sister Doctor. "If he ever wakes up."

 "The threat to Animals during the Wizard's reign crowded
me--humanward--and I have been safer than many. Now, as our violently holy
Emperor demands all our souls, I want to go to my death as an Animal:
proud, isolate, unconsecrated. Find him for me. Hurry. I will give
you--two rare male skarks to ride--and a panther to travel by your side as
far as the forest. You will travel faster on the backs of those beasts
than you did on foot or on mules. If you aren't ambushed by soldiers or
wolves or any other enemy, you may make it by sunrise. At the edge of
the forest the panther will turn back, but the skark will keep on, and
by then the worst of the jackal moonlight will be spent."

 The maunts nodded their heads and rose to take their leave. They didn't
expect to see Princess Nastoya again, dead or alive, an Elephant or a
human. They didn't want to tire her with further discussion. But it was
she who raised the last point, when they were almost beyond addressing.

 "My friends," she said. They turned. "You have been kind to me, and
good to each other. I am not so far dead that I haven't seen this. How
can you perform such works in the name of the Unnamed God, whose agents
belittle us so?"

 "The Unnamed God does not descend from the Emperor," explained Sister
Doctor. She was afraid that an obscure point of contemporary unionist
theology might be lost on a pagan, but she was reluctant to treat the
Princess like a fool. "The Unnamed God, whatever they may say in the
Emerald City these days, is still in its essence unnamed. We have as
much a right to work in its name as anyone else."

 "Hardly seems worth the bother to believe," murmured Princess Nastoya.
"Still, life itself seems more than patently fantastic, and we believe
in life, so I'll let the matter drop."

 

 THE RIDE WOULD BE SWIFTbut rollicking. These skarks were large of
pelvis, supported by longer back legs than other skark varieties. Around
their legs circled the panther like an eddy of black oil, constantly
swishing by.

 Lord Shem Ottokos escorted them safely out of the camp. Sister
Apothecaire was disappointed that there were so few Scrow to wave
good-bye to them. "You'll have noticed the creatures circling," said
Ottokos. The maunts looked uneasily at each other. "In the sky, I mean."

 "Vultures?" said Sister Apothecaire. "Sensing the carrion of Princess
Nastoya? She would supply a healthy portion of carrion to a bevy of
vultures."

 "They are higher up than vultures, I think," said Ottokos. "So,
according to the laws of perception, they must be larger than vultures.
Besides, vultures wait for the body to die before approaching. I fear
they are a squadron of attack creatures who don't wait until the meat is
dead. Perhaps--well, I hardly dare say it. Dragons."

 "Dragons are rare in the first place, and in any case docile," snapped
Sister Doctor. "Menacing dragons are only mythology."

 "Myth has a way of coming true," said Ottokos. "I'm merely sayingBe
careful ."

 "How kind to set our minds at ease, just as we depart from your
protection." Sister Doctor looked livid.

 "You have the panther. Nothing will get by her."

 "Good-bye, then," said Sister Doctor. "I hope you have learned
something from us."

 Sister Apothecaire sniffled into a souvenir shawl that she'd bought at
an inflated price from a Scrow weaver.

 Shem Ottokos watched them leave. He did wish them well, at least as far
as the mauntery, and the completion of their task for his Princess.
Beyond that, he wished them nothing at all: Let their Unnamed God go on
unnaming their lives for them.

 

 THE SNOUT OF THE JACKALmoon poked over the line of the trees.

 Liir was nearly grey. The bleeding was staunched, but his heart was
lurching. Candle worked at her throat, trying to scream for help, but
she could not make that strong a sound.

 No, she thought, the poor cold boy, no. Not this.

 She put her domingon down and rubbed his shoulders. Then she removed
his splints and braces and massaged his arms and legs. The air was
turning from chilly to icy, and the extra blankets were in the hallway,
beyond the locked door. She felt something lurch in him--he, who had been
absent for so long--something kicked and resisted the death that seemed
to be settling upon him. His breath was halting. A long moment without a
breath; another.

 She leaned over his brow from above, and held his newly bearding cheeks
in both hands, and laid her nose next to his, and breathed into him, and
kissed him besides.

 

 "WELL,THERE'SSOMETHING FOR YOU, NOW,"said Chyde. "It never hurts to
read the small print, my lad. Jibbidee, my walking stick? And it's not
even that far, though in a quarter I rarely get to visit myself. Let's go."

 The elf came forward with a walking stick, and Chyde stood erect, or as
erect as he could. Long years of desk work had crushed his hips cruelly,
and his posture was poor. Still, at a new angle, he was able to look
Liir over a bit more thoroughly than he'd yet managed.

 "You hadn't ought to have arrived with a firearm," he said with sudden
harshness. "You'll leave that with Jibbidee at once, my lad-ee-oh."

 "It's no firearm. It's a broom."

 "Show it me."

 Liir opened the satchel and displayed the top end of the charred
broom-pole.

 "Let me see the length of it, to be sure it's not a blunder-bulleter in
disguise."

 The broom was withdrawn and Liir handed it over. "A right wreck of a
thing, but for the new growth," said Chyde, handing it back.

 "What?"

 Liir didn't ask again, but felt it. The broom handle was notched with
young nubs, and two of them had split, revealing modest embellishments
of pale green leaf, like tiny rare broaches pinned to an old bit of
scrap wood.

 "It can't grow!" said Liir in amazement. "It can't do that."

 "Put it away," said Chyde. "Some folks haven't seen a green leaf
growing in twenty years. You don't want to get them all weepy now, do
you? Mercy is the name of the game in this trade." He kissed a vulgar
emerald on the knuckle of his own middle finger, paying obeisance.

 They set off, not in the direction of the waterway, but along a broad
passage that served as a commercial parade for the underground
settlement. More humans in evidence now, part of the vast employment
network that kept Southstairs running, though the shops and stalls were
largely staffed by elves who seemed to have raised obsequiousness to an
art form. Here and there, the nice contrast of a grumpy dwarf. The noise
was ordinary chatter and gossip, and it was some time before Liir
realized what made it seem strange. For once, there was no little strain
of music playing off to one side. Well, who would play music in a
prison, after all?

 The roofs of the cavern rose higher overhead, passing out of view into
darkness. More of the structures were freestanding, supplied with their
own tiled roofs, like buildings on any aboveground street. It felt like
a city of the dead. Eventually Liir could see why: this must be the
oldest district in Southstairs. It certainly seemed the most decrepit,
so far. Above it, all at once, the claustrophobic blackness of cave-dark
gave way to the blackness of a different sort: a moonless night, with
scratchy scarves of cloud being drawn by the wind across ancient,
disaffected stars. It was the middle of Southstairs, the original
geologic bucket that must have suggested itself as a natural prison to
the first settlers of the Emerald City.

 "Stars, they give me the creeps," said Chyde. "I hate to come this way."

 They found a set of steps leading farther down. Chyde asked for
directions once or twice, and sent Jibbidee scampering to check the
marks on buildings. "This'll be it, I guess," he said. "It's an Animal
district, so you'll forgive the stench. Hygiene isn't their strong suit,
as you know."

 The air was so cold, though, with a wind whipping in from above, that
the smell seemed negligible. At any rate, Liir was too excited to care.
He found himself bobbing up and down, and once he nearly grabbed Chyde's
hand to squeeze it. So what that Shell was a bounder, that Lady Glinda
was a glamorous airhead! They'd done something good; he'd gotten here.
He'd find her, his only peer and friendmate, his half-sister if that
version of history was true--the girl who befriended mice, and shared her
gingerbread, and who had giggled at bedtime, even when threatened by a
spanking. He would liberate Nor, and then--and then--

 He couldn't think beyond that. Just to see her, someone he had known
once, back when the world had been something other than tragic, back
when Elphaba had been stalking about the castle out west in her robes
and rages! Back when home was still home!

 Jibbidee skittered forward, back, anxious and irritable. "What, what's
the matter, thingy?" asked Chyde. "Cat got your tongue? Ha-ha." He
turned to Liir. "It did, you know. That's why he can't talk. It'll grow
back in time, but at the moment it's a bloody little stump."

 They pressed into a building, more a pen than a set of salons. A Sow
was lying in straw trying to warm some Piglets, most of whom looked to
be dead. Improbably, the runt had survived, but it was not long for this
world.

 Chyde voiced what Liir was himself wondering. "An odd place to put a
girl child. What was I thinking of? You. Sow. We're looking for a girl,
a human girl child. Name of Nor. The register puts her in this unlikely
spot."

 "She had some developmental problems," explained the Sow without
opening her eyes. "Some lodgings coordinator decided that, among the
likes of me and mine, she wouldn't seem as offensive."

 "Where is she?"

 "I would construct a good story if I had the strength," said the Sow,
"but I'm conserving what energy I have left for my litter. In fact, the
girl's own story is good enough. Do you remember when the butchers came
through a week or ten days ago to cull the crop because a roast of loin
was required? Some celebration Upside. It was the Wizard's deposal,
wasn't it?"

 Chyde looked slantwise at Liir. "We don't sacrifice Animals for
ceremonial meals, don't be silly," he said hastily. "You're talking
through your postdelivery deliriums, Sow." He twisted rings on his
fingers, turning some jewels palmward, other jewels out.

 "Whatever," she said. "My deliriums remind me about a couple of Horned
Hogs, long in the tooth if they'd still had teeth, who were going to
make better rump roasts this year than next, I'll tell you. They knew
their days were numbered. One of them had broken off a horn trying to
escape, and the bone spur was sharp and useful. Didn't you read the
report on this?"

 "I've fallen behind. Terrible workload, and no one to pick up the
slack. Jibbidee's next to useless. Where is the girl, that's what I want
to know."

 "I'm telling you. The Hogs entered a kind of suicide pact, and the bull
killed the bitch and then himself. They arranged it to be done on the
same slab of old door on which they'd have been carried out for
slaughtering anyway. A kind of final comment on the quality of life at
Southstairs."

 "Only the best is good enough," said Chyde.

 "So they let themselves putrefy, and we neighbors left them to it for
as long as we could stand it. It bought us all some time. But you know
as well as I that the entrails of Horned Hogs breed a kind of maggot
that likes to burrow into human orifices, especially the airless ones--"

 "Stop... 
 "And there's little less airless than Southstairs--"

 "I don't want to hear about it--"

 "So your colleagues had to cart the carcasses Upside. They had no choice."

 Chyde said softly, "You'll get a huge extra bucket of slops for this.
Keep on."

 "I had no way of suspecting that the poor suckling Nor had a
functioning brain left in her skull," said the Sow. "But apparently she
did. She climbed onto the door-slab and pulled the Hog carcasses over
her. I certainly hope for her sake she plugged all her valves. I saw her
chewing candlewax once, so maybe she was softening it for just such a
purpose. Anyway, hidden by corpses, she was carried away a few days ago,
though what happened to her once she left our happy home I can't say."

 "The very least of my concerns," said Chyde. He glanced at Liir, who
was tremblingly pale and gulping for air. "You take it so hard, lad? Why
is that? Sounds like she got out--something you'd never have persuaded me
into allowing. Don't weep, silly boy." Then he said, "Jibbidee. The runt."

 "Oh no you don't," said the Sow, struggling to her feet. The elf was
defter, though, and he had scrabbled over the boards and across the
straw, and snatched the Piglet before the Sow could position herself in
full defense. "You bastard!" she cried.

 "I've been remiss; I haven't noticed. Poor Sow: You've far too much on
your mind. This should relieve you of distractions." Chyde grabbed the
squealing Piglet from the elf and hurled it against a beam. His aim was
true; the blood spattered and the body fell with a thud into the slop
trough.

 In shock Liir fell against the fence, and the maddened Sow went for
him, but Chyde, laughing, pulled the boy away in time. "You should've
let someone know these shenanigans were going on," he said to the Sow.
"Being a squealer isn't such a bad thing in a Pig. And we all have to do
our duty--you, me, and the least little daisy in the field. Eh? Eh?"

 8

 THE PANTHER HAD GONEas far as she would go, and turned back. Now the
canopy of oakhair limbs formed over their heads. In the short time that
they'd been away from the mauntery, however, the wind had scoured the
trees of their last leaves. The jackal moon, though sinking toward the
horizon, still watched Sister Doctor and Sister Apothecaire as their
high-rumped skarks fleet-footed it through the forest. The unnamed
creatures still circled overhead, following their progress.

 "I could use a moment to pee," called Sister Apothecaire at one point.
"A Munchkin woman doesn't have as large a bladder as some others."

 "Winter wolves come out at dawn," Sister Doctor replied, "so shut up
and hold your bladder if you can, or pee in your saddle."

 9

 CANDLE HAD SEEN ENOUGH OF DEATHto know that Liir was about to die. She
was breathing him and kissing him as best she could, rubbing his limbs
to encourage what warmth remained. His scalp was like ice. She took off
her underskirts and tried to wrap them like a turban around his head, to
keep his brain alive. From time to time she went and kicked against the
door, hoping to arouse some maunt doing midnight devotions, but she
couldn't keep up the effort. She couldn't stay away from him. As he grew
more distant and colder, she grew warmer in her panic, and climbed atop
him and tried to rescue him with her own warmth. She kissed him and
licked his eyelids as a cat might, trying to open them. She didn't know
what his eyes looked like, even, and she was stretched naked upon him
like a wife.

 

 LIIR BROKE AWAY FROMCHYDE,stumbling, his eyes shut against the tears
and the memory of the blameless Piglet. Just like that, without cause!
What then, thinking they had some cause, might they have done to Nor?

 "Be it on your own head if you get lost down here," called Chyde, not
much alarmed. "You won't get far, and there's none to help. Come back to
headquarters when you've had enough wheeling about and I'll get you a
hot meal. There's no reason for me to be inhospitable, you being a guest
of Lady Glinda and all. I'm not unreasonable. I live to serve, as my
dear former wife always knew me to say."

 Liir lurched, first running, then sinking almost to his knees and
catching himself, then running again. He didn't know how to find the
waterway on which he and Shell had arrived. He threw down his torch,
hoping it would catch something on fire and turn the place into the hell
it seemed, but the torch only rolled once or twice and then dropped into
a canal. There it sizzled out, and the stick bobbed like a hard new turd.

 The dark was less intense, though, than he'd reckoned on, and in a
moment he thought to look around. He was in a small square of faceless
buildings, just a few bolted doors, possibly a warehouse district. It
was empty of pedestrians and fairly quiet, too, as this place went, and
above him was a scatter of starry deep.

 His only thought was that there was nothing left, nothing to live for,
nothing to wait for, nothing to remember. The stars were cold and he
couldn't leap to grasp them, to pass fist over fist along their lofty
network of knobs, arrive someplace new, and, if not safe, at least less
heinous. They merely mocked, as stars were created to do.

 He hugged himself, for here the wind swept in without interference. He
pulled the cape like a blanket about him, and clutched the broom as if
it were the Piglet, and he could will it back to life. His tears came
hot and desperate, the only warmth in the universe.

 The broom twitched once or twice, and he took it out of the satchel. It
shook itself slightly, and seemed firmer in his grasp. The old dusty
straws at the back end, bound in a bristly fagot for sweeping so long
ago, were freshened with green--even in this starry half-light he could
see the color. Cattails, or grass tips in seed, something like that. He
didn't know the plant.

 He threw his leg over the broom without thinking and he held on tight,
and he rode it up the draft from hell, and into the night.

 10

 WHEN SHE HEARD THE KEY IN THE DOOR OPEN,she came to her senses, and
collected her hair from where it had spilled across his face, and
climbed down.

 Mother Yackle was smiling almost as if she had a sensible thought in
her head, though according to the other novices Mother Yackle had been
senile for as long as anyone could remember. The old crippled creature
pulled the door aside and dropped her head, as if affording Candle some
privacy as she composed herself.

 Liir stirred, and sighed. Though his eyes remained closed, the lids
both twitched, just faintly. One hand clenched, then released.

 By the time the jackal moon was gone for another generation, and the
Superior Maunt and her returning agents, Sisters Doctor and Apothecaire,
had made it up the steps to the infirmary, Liir and Candle were gone, too.

 The Service

 

 ANOTION OF CHARACTER,not so much discredited as simply forgotten, once
held that people only came into themselves partway through their lives.
They woke up, were they lucky enough to have consciousness, in the act
of doing something they already knew how to do: feeding themselves with
currants. Walking the dog. Knotting up a broken bootlace. Singing
antiphonally in the choir. Suddenly: This is I, I am the girl singing
this alto line offkey, I am the boy loping after the dog, and I can see
myself doing it as, presumably, the dog cannot see itself. How peculiar!
I lift on my toes at the end of the dock, to dive into the lake because
I am hot, and while isolated like a specimen in the glassy slide of
summer, the notions ofhot andlake andI converge into a consciousness of
consciousness--in an instant, in between launch and landing, even before
I cannonball into the lake, shattering both my reflection and my old
notion of myself.

 That was what was once believed. Now, it seems hardly to matter when
and how we become ourselves--or even what we become. Theory chases theory
about how we are composed. The only constant: the abjuration of personal
responsibility.

 We are the next thing the Time Dragon is dreaming, and nothing to be
done about it.

 We are the fanciful sketch of wry Lurline, we are droll and ornamental,
and no more culpable than a sprig of lavender or a sprig of lightning,
and nothing to be done about it.

 We are an experiment in situation ethics set by the Unnamed God, which
in keeping its identity secret also cloaks the scope of the experiment
and our chances of success or failure at it--and nothing to be done about it.

 We are loping sequences of chemical conversions, acting ourselves
converted. We are twists of genes acting ourselves twisted; we are wicks
of burning neuroses acting ourselves wicked. And nothing to be done
about it. And nothing to be done about it.

 

 IN SOME MORE HUMBLE QUARTERSof Oz, gossip had long held that Elphaba
Thropp, the Wicked Witch of the West, had been born a wise soul, already
formed, somehow conscious. Why else the mouthful of sharp choppers, not
so much baby pearls as python's teeth, which some folk insisted she'd
sported at birth? She came into the world with advance knowledge of its
corruption, and in the womb she had prepared for it as best she could,
by growing those teeth.

 That was what was said, anyway.

 Not everyone is born a witch or a saint. Not everyone is born talented,
or crooked, or blessed; some are born definite in no particular at all.
We are a fountain of shimmering contradictions, most of us. Beautiful in
the concept, if we're lucky, but frequently tedious or regrettable as we
flesh ourselves out.

 The governesses of the monied classes often held that a child ought to
be kept from witnessing cruelty and ugliness, the better to preserve
some ounce of innocence. Rural grannies and spinster aunts--like the
Nanny who had helped raise Elphaba--neither mollied nor coddled. They
believed it was better for a child to know what befalls a chicken when
the feast of Lurlinemas rolls around. Better to learn--from a
distance--the tricks perpetrated on the weak, the distractible, the unlucky.

 Both pedagogical stances, however, relied on a common assumption.
Growth and change were viewed as a reaction to conditions met. One might
as easily argue, however, that it is the world's obligation to respond
to children. By force of personality, by dint of their vicious beauty
and untamed ways, children tromp into the world ready to disfigure it.
Children surrender nothing when faced with the world: it is the world
that gives up, over and over again. By so giving up, of course, it
renews itself--that is the secret. Dying in order to live, that sort of
thing.

 You could catalog the thousand ways people shrink from life, as if
chance and change are by their nature toxic, disfiguring. Elphaba, with
her sympathies far more substantial than her luck, had at least wrestled
with the questions. She'd shoved, and barked, and made herself a right
nuisance.

 By contrast, the Quadling girl, Candle, was an interpreter savant,
translating the text of a world whose fundamental nature she hadn't yet
grasped, and maybe never would. Did the difference between an Elphaba
and a Candle come down merely to a question of focal depth: the big
picture versus the little picture?

 For his part, Liir had not been a bright child. Even on the edge of
puberty he had given little thought to the paradoxes of his existence.
He had imagined himself to be more like Chistery, the chief Snow Monkey,
than like Nor and her brothers, Irji and Manek. Chistery had a
slipsy-doodle sense of language, but he tended toward steadiness. He did
his chores without complaining or forgetting, and asked for nothing
beyond his basic needs. Even at fourteen, Liir hadn't been much more
demanding than Chistery.

 But Liir remembered that Nor had addressed the stars, had sung harmony
with mountain streams, had loved all creatures whether their initial
letters were written Great or small--Animal or animal. She was nuts as a
nut tree in a nut forest, of course: that was what he had thought
without realizing he was thinking anything at all. That silly Nor was a
creature apart. Not just as a girl--though that, too, of course--but as a
fragment of human possibility. She had had a sympathetic imagination,
and Liir?--he could barely count.

 Children often define themselves in relation to their parents:
emulating them or working hard as possible to avoid resembling them in
any way. Since the identity of both his parents was in doubt, Liir
couldn't see himself as taking after anyone for sure. Certainly not
Elphaba. In her final months, stooped, crabbed, scrabbling from desk to
podium to window ledge, she was more like a quivering scorpion than a
woman. At rest her fingers tended to curl up like a claw, or like the
petals of a flower gone a bit blowsy: her hand was always out, always
open, ready to take what found its way there and seize it. Not at all
like Liir, who cowered.

 Among the human kind, thought even the most jaded and bitter of
Animals, there are many ways to be wrong, but there are only a
relatively few ways to be young. In their generous apprehension of the
world, for their insatiable appetite for the world, the young are to be
forgiven.

 

 SOMEWHERE IN THE SULFUROUS UPDRAFTabove the great maw of Southstairs,
Liir was born out of a dark vile womb and thrown into the night. He came
into himself perched on a broomstick dozens of yards above the highest
watchtower. Here was a cushion of wind, billowing him almost onto his
side, causing his shins to tighten automatically against each other, his
arms instinctively to wrap the broomstick harder. It was Liir and wind
and height and stars, it was alone and alone and alone; the
understandings were distinct and differentiated, and then suddenly
annealed by a process he couldn't name. Maybe fear of heights!
HisLiirness applied, suddenly, applied to himself and no one else.

 He didn't know whatLiirness might mean, and he was sorry Elphaba wasn't
around to raise a mocking eyebrow and sling a caustic remark. He might
have been hurt by her sly digs, but he could have relished that hurt,
too--he saw now. Survived it? Transformed it.

 A hurting Liir was a real Liir.

 However he'd come to be here--settling on an unstable bolster of
thermal, learning to slide up the banister of the night--there was no
else doing it but Liir.

 The Emerald City gaped at him, but it didn't understand what it saw. He
was just a touch of ash from a hearty fire, a scrap of tinder tossed in
the winds. Winds that were damned strong; they snatched at the hem of
his cape and unrolled it off his shoulders until it trailed behind him,
a stain.

 For his part, he saw the City the way few others had. Well, Elphaba
must have! And anyone lucky enough to harness a Pfenix, that rare
creature. The view was like a model of a city made with an impossibly
deft hand--hundreds and hundreds of buildings, grand and humble, glazed
with tile and black with soot. A city built on a gentle rise, he could
now see: long slicing boulevards and curving promenades, a honeycomb of
streets and canals, parks and squares, a thousand mews, ten thousand
alleys, a hundred thousand windows blinking bronzely. A glowing organ,
like the illuminated heart of Oz itself pushed through the flesh of the
land, pulsing with its own life, tricked out with monuments, defaced
with the graffiti of broken trees, the Palace of the Wizard a cancer
upon the landscape, the dead center of it all.

 In his grief at having missed a chance to save Nor, and his shock of
the unanticipated flight, and the confusion about what to do next, he
was more successively Liir with every breath.

 He circled the Emerald City, afraid if he landed he would return to
being slightly dead. How could anyone live without flying?

 

 SO THE BOYHOODof Liir began--began in a new way, as if all that had gone
before had happened to someone else.

 But it seemed amazing to him that he'd had the courage to set out
cross-country with that Dorothy. Was it courage? Perhaps it had only
been sheer ignorance of the breadth and treachery of the world.

 The broom brought him to ground on the cobblestoned quay near one of
the smaller canals. The wind was strong, so itinerants were huddled
face-front around brazier fires made of scrap wood and boards ripped
from fences. No one saw him land.

 Bravado was not what he felt; but he felt something, and that was rare
enough. A cold sense of thrill: absorbing the news of Nor's escape, her
being alive. Wounded, cursed, embattled--alive nonetheless.

 He walked for a while along the quay but realized it was colder there,
and ducked into an alley. The broom on his shoulder bounced as he walked
and looked for a place to doss down. It bounced harder, as if thwacking
him with congratulations, but this was silly: he was walking with a
spring in his step.

 After a while he just jumped, six, eight times in a row, in glee, like
a kid playing Hoptoad Hoptoad Call My Hoptoad. He'd look a right idiot
to anyone peering out a window, but he didn't care.

 

 AGOOD NIGHT'S sleep under a rubble of marketplace hay neither dampened
his spirits nor inspired him with a plan. Eventually he made it back to
Lady Glinda's town house in Mennipin Square. Perhaps she could arrange
another meeting with Commander Cherrystone, who might be able to find
out what had happened when Nor had had herself secreted upstairs. Or
maybe Lady Glinda had an opening for a bootblack or a son.

 The houseboy who had first talked to Liir reported that Lady Glinda had
repaired to Mockbeggar Hall, the Chuffrey country pile near Restwater,
there to do good works among the rural poor. It pleased her to dispense
largesse from time to time. It calmed her nerves and made her happier
with her marriage. She'd brought her cabinet with her, hoping that some
grouse hunting of a sunny afternoon would breed camaraderie and unity of
purpose, or if not, that one or two of the more difficult ministers
might be shot accidentally in a convenient hunting accident. More than
one kind of grouse needs bringing down!

 That was how the houseboy put it, anyway--with high knowingness. No,
there was no way to say when Her Ladyship might return. In her absence,
the household was investing in a pack of howling Bratweilers, which as a
breed was not known for its docile disposition. And take off that suit
of livery, by the by, lest the house of Chuffrey be besmirched by
whatever smut you're about to get up to.

 Liir was happy to oblige. His old garments, which had been placed in a
bin for disposal, were dug out and tossed at him. Wriggling into them,
Liir noticed an unfamiliar snugness. As if his limbs were lengthening
after just one flight.

 The rest of his life, and all its possibilities, were spread like a
landscape before him, and he couldn't help taking in three or four
breaths, keenly and quickly, to sample the day. The air was bracing and
his blood quickened. He felt as lithe and full of ginger as that cunning
Shell had seemed. Liir could commit a crime, or...  banter with fellows
on the street...  wink at a girl and cadge a kiss. That’s'what people
did. He could do that.

 Soon. First he answered the summons of a carillon and presented himself
on the broad steps of a church. He had a dim memory of mauntish prayers,
but not of services, and this morning he felt worthy enough to feel
humble. He would prostrate himself before whatever-it-was-in-there, and
thank the Unnamed God for having brought him that close to Nor. And ask
what next.

 The doors were flung open and the service just starting. Was it a
holiday, and he hadn't known? Or were churches in the Emerald City
always this thronged? Peering between the unstooped shoulders of
gentlemen standing in the vestibule, Liir caught sight of the wide,
bright room, a preacher of some sort declaiming from a plinth to a sea
of faces varnished with rapture or, at any rate, close attention.

 "I'm sure our Unnamed God requires of us conviction and perseverance.
I'm sure our Unnamed God grants us the privilege of obedience. In the
face of uncertainty, the one thing we can be sure of is the value of
certainty. And the Unnamed God bestows upon us the balm of certainty."

 He's sure of a lot, thought Liir; how consoling to stand within the
sound of such confidence. And the way he rolls "our Unnamed God" off his
tongue--theour might as well bemy, he's that well placed. People say "my
God!" all the time, but usually they mean "oh shit." He means something
better.

 Liir stood on his toes. The homilist was an affable older man, neither
handsome nor plain--rather forgettable, but radiant with the effort of
explaining the Unnamed God to all these devout, and devoutly interested,
people. He looked a bit like an animated puppet, tufts of hair behind
his ears taking a red tint from the colored windows behind him. "Let us
continue this celebration of Thanksgiving for our deliverance from the
Witch. Our independence from the Wizard and our relief from the Witch
bring all of Oz to a new chance for greatness. Miss Grayling will lead
us in Anthem Eleven: ‘One Truth, One Truth Alone.'"

 He wasn't sure he'd heard correctly. The room was so very crowded, and
now skirts rustled and scratched, boots scuffled, as people rose to
sing. He didn't know the anthem but the refrain was simple enough.

 "One truth alone we hear:

 Your secret holy plan.

 With so much yet to fear,

 We trust what truth we can."

 The choir sang an unintelligible verse and the chorus began again, and
this time Liir tried to join in, but an usher grabbed him by the collar
and sidled him backward over the threshold.

 "I know what you're after," said the usher. "Any cash in these pockets
goes into the collection plate."

 "I'm not a pickpocket," said Liir.

 "Oh? You didn't exactly dress for the service." The usher had a point.
Compared to the pious at noisy prayer, Liir looked like a peasant.
"Catch you inside again, I'll alert the constable, who's sitting in the
back row on the ready."

 "Sorry," said Liir. But he found he could listen from the top step
almost as well, and the air was nicer outside anyway--not so clotted with
perfume and incense.

 At the base of the wide stairs loitered a group of urchins, the oldest
at least four or five years younger than Liir. They looked up at him as
if he were one of them. "You don't go in either?" he asked them.

 "Never had a chance," said one; "Never wanted a chance," added another.

 "What're you doing here?"

 "Charity pennies when the service lets out, stupid."

 "Oh. Right. Don't you get cold?"

 "No," said a small girl missing some front teeth. "We fights a lot to
keep warm."

 "It's a good song," said Liir. "Can you hear it from down there?"

 "Don't know hymny-singing."

 He began to hum the melody and came down a few steps. "One truth alone
we hear," he said with bright enunciation, "your secret holy plan."

 They liked the sound of a secret holy plan. "What is it?" said the
gap-toothed girl.

 "It's secret, stupid," said the older boy.

 "Shut up," said Liir, happy to be bringing joy and religion to the
masses. "Your secret holy plan... t it? Da da da something, we trust what
truth we can. Now there'll be another verse and they'll start over.
Everyone ready?"

 "You're a ragamuffin cleric," said an older girl, but she sang when the
chorus came around again, and the others chimed in with more gusto than
grace until the usher came out with the constable, and they all had to
scatter.

 "Thanks," said the urchin leader, "now we got a song, but we got no
breakfasts. Come on, looters; we'll go steal bread from the pigeons near
the Ozma Fountains."

 "Surely there'll be more food to go around," said Liir. "I mean now the
Wizard is deposed."

 The kids ran and laughed, as all kids can, even malnourished urchins.
"What, because he's not around to eat his own portion? We'll see about
that!"

 Undaunted, Liir wandered about until he came to a small hostelry. A
sign readSURGERY FOR THE SENSELESS , and beneath that hung a wooden
image of scissors in the act of snipping off the heads of a bunch of
daisies.

 This time he knew enough not to go in the front door but to wander the
alley behind till he found another entrance. A graceful young woman in a
dotted purple cloak came to the door when he knocked. "I'm looking for
an Arjiki girl, about sixteen, newly sprung from prison, and possibly in
poor health. Would she have come here?"

 "We tend the wrinklies here."

 "Well, then," he ventured, "I'm here to offer my services."

 "We have no budget for a houseboy."

 "I don't need funds. Just a place to sleep and something to eat from
time to time. I can help take care of the senseless. I had an old Nanny
who needed all kinds of assistance, and I know how. I don't mind."

 "When we're through with them, they don't need much help," said the
woman. "They don't care so much what goes right or wrong for them
anymore, and that's a blessing, don't you think?"

 "I suppose so. I'm merely looking to be of service," he explained.My
life started today , he wanted to add, but she looked too cross to take
it all in.

 "I wouldn't be surprised if the solicitor sent you to spy on us," she
replied. "We doctor the patients, not their last wills and testaments.
We've been cleared of suspicion any number of times. Why are you
tormenting us? Isn't there supposed to be some relief of oppression now
that the Wizardic administration has left the Palace?"

 "I'm not from the Palace," he said, affronted partly, but also
impressed: could he seem that old and competent already?

 "If you don't go away I'll set the cat on you." She pulled down her
sleeve; her left arm was raw with swellings and scabs. "Unlike some,
he's not very nice since he's been neutered," she said ominously. Liir
had the feeling that if there was a cat in the house, it was really a
Cat. He backed off.

 "I couldn't just come in and get warm?" he began, but she had shut the
door.

 

 DAYS WENT BY,and he was glad to have learned about the stale bread fed
to the pigeons at the Ozma Fountains. He kept body and soul together
there. Scrambling for food, he wasn't as nimble as some of the street
dodgers, but his legs were longer, so he made out all right. At night he
had the benefit of the cape as a blanket, so he was warmer than some.

 He asked about Nor, but the City was filled with itinerant children,
and to the good burghers of Oz, tinker children were anonymous when they
weren't invisible. No one had noticed an Arjiki girl on her own, and
push off, you, before we call the authorities.

 He thought about Princess Nastoya, but what could he do? The famous
Wizard of Oz, granter of wishes, wasn't going to stage a comeback just
so Liir could beg for help for that old She-Elephant. And there was no
one else to ask.

 Determined not to be cowed, Liir took to hanging around the army
barracks just inside the south gate, known as Munchkin Mousehole, a
reference to the diminutive stature of Munchkinlanders. The Emerald City
Home Guard was better fed than the poor under the bridges, that much was
obvious. After a while Liir decided that membership in the Home Guard
would relieve his hunger while he tried to decide what to do next. And
maybe he'd find that devoting his life to service paid dividends.

 Stuffing the old cape in a sack, pressing it as compacted as he could
manage, Liir joined the throng of roughhouse boys on the parade
grounds--the boys who played gooseball with soldiers at free exercise.
The lads hoped to merit the gift of a cracker or a coin or a plug of
tobacco, but Liir wanted more. He bade his time and steeled his nerve.

 One afternoon a sudden hailstorm blew in from the Kells. Everyone
scattered for cover. Liir ducked into a narrow archway hardly large
enough to protect one. The soldier already there couldn't be more than a
year or two older than Liir, and so they fell into conversation as they
waited out the storm.

 The soldier, proud of his stature as Petty Fife in the Guard's musical
corps, told Liir where and how to apply, and what to say that would
amuse the conscripting officers. "Don't tell them you don't know who
your parents are," he advised. "The officers are a high-strung bunch.
They think that all the orphans who apply are really sent there by their
parents, infiltrating the Guard for an eventual insurrection. If you're
really an orphan, lie. Tell them your folks can't keep from screwing and
they just had their twelfth baby, and you were kicked out of the family
sty. That they'd understand; they're screw-starved here, a lot of them."

 In time, Liir followed the advice, and learned it was sound. Though
eight other gaunt-cheeked boys presented themselves in the same
audience, only Liir answered smartly enough to be signed up. He was
given a number, a cot, a cabin, a chit for meals, a key, a position
title--Second Scrub--and a job, doing just that: potatoes in the
commissary kitchen, morning, noon, and evening. The Home Guard ate
little but potatoes, it seemed.

 Still, there he was! Here he was! It seemed too good to be true. A
smart uniform--someone else's before it was his, for a few old stains
hadn't entirely washed out, and one sleeve had been replaced with a new
one cut from a cheaper weight of broadcloth--but smart just the same. It
came with a cap sporting a stiff silly brim in front, and a cocky
periwinkle-colored tuft up top. The outfiteer also located a pair of
boots, down at the heel and splayed at the toe, but serviceable enough,
for they were conveniently overlarge and could take an extra pair of
socks in the toe, which kept out the cold.

 Once in a while Liir caught sight of the chatty fellow who had
befriended him in the archway, but that soldier was assigned to a
different division. In any case, Liir was determined to maintain a
comfortable anonymity, so he didn't go chasing for friends, neither in
his own division nor beyond it.

 One morning in the yard, when Liir was hauling sacks of potatoes from a
delivery cart, he spotted Commander Cherrystone arriving in a brougham.
The man appeared weary. Liir hung back and kept silent, but he invented
reasons to linger in the area. He watched as the Commander spoke with a
sergeant at arms. The Commander took a cup of coffee in a china cup and
reviewed a construction site marked out for a new latrine or barracks or
something. He then disappeared into a foreman's shed with a roll of
schemes under his arm.

 An hour or so later he emerged, a cigarette between his gloved fingers.
Liir approached Commander Cherrystone and reintroduced himself, a new
politeness and reserve hiding what remained of his disapproval.
Cherrystone might still be helpful.

 "Yes, yes," said the Commander, distracted. Liir wasn't even sure
Cherrystone remembered him, but the commander listened politely and said
he would try to find out what he could about the details of carcass
removal at Southstairs. "You mustn't hold your breath though," he said.
"I've a lot on my plate. There is much to be done for the defense of our
city."

 "There is? But we're not at war? I thought peace was at hand."

 "Your highborn champion, Lady Glinda, thinks all is peaches and cream.
She'd like it to be. But given the uncertainty of the political
situation, the economy needs stimulus, and the threat of war is a great
incentive to spend. Fiscal frottage."

 Liir didn't know what this meant. But things did seem to be happening.
For weeks, and then for months, he fed potatoes to the burly soldiers
who dug and hauled the earth away from the building site, and eventually
began the even harder work of setting colossal foundation stones in
place. Liir was glad he was a slender thing, for he was better suited to
kitchen work than transporting boulders. But slowly he deduced that,
despite his nothing childhood in the nowhere mountains, he wasn't quite
as obtuse as he'd imagined.

 He had no reason for smugness about it, to be sure. He was a bumpkin
when it came to national affairs. He'd had little schooling and less
practice at rhetoric. He didn't venture an opinion about current
affairs, for he hardly knew what they were. No one bothered to circulate
news broadsides in the barracks, and the banter at mealtime boasted
about whores and sores. Period.

 What Liir discovered, rather, was that merely by hanging around in the
company of Elphaba he had picked up--something. Not power, not intuition,
which she seemed to have down to her very eyelash. Not understanding.
But something else--a good ear, anyway. Would he could find a way to
perform a spell! That was the ultimate competence with language, a skill
Elphaba had had in spades, and that she used rarely and reluctantly.
What is a spell after all but a way of coaxing syllables together so
persuasively that some new word is spelled... me imprecision clarified,
some name Named... d some change managed.

 Despite his flight on the broom, Liir was sure he had no instinct for
magic. It was the broom that had managed that feat: he'd gone for the
ride, nothing more. If he'd ever felt the slightest tremor of intuition
or capacity, he'd have pounced on it like a cat on a rat. No, he was
duller than the other kitchen lads even about basic things. He couldn't
even predict when he was going to need to use the latrine.

 But he found himself rounding syllables like stones in his mouth,
silently. He knew he was shy, and thought to be stupid; he was beginning
to suspect, though, that he wasn't stupid. Perhaps not even slow. Merely
uneducated. But not, he hoped, uneducable.

 

 COMMANDERCHERRYSTONE DIDN'T COMEseeking out Liir to answer his question
about Nor. When several more weeks had passed and there was no sign of
the Commander again, and no message passed on by his aide-de-camp, Liir
began to press the issue to others in the Home Guard. Cautiously he
started to circulate a scrap of gossip he had invented. A pair of Horned
Hogs was slain in Southstairs--because the Hogs were magic. Their
carcasses were removed before they could contaminate the other inmates
with sorceric powers. Could it be? The kitchen boys, hungry for tales of
enchantment, took up the story as if it were gospel. Liir hoped his
invention would trip a rebuttal, turning up some useful information
about the actual disposition of the Hogs--and by extension, suggest Nor's
next whereabouts. But revelation was slow in coming.

 The winter crashed in with icy spite. His hands turned red and
chilblained from the water into which the potatoes dropped. At least he
wasn't freezing or starving to death outside; snow was felling dozens.
He bade his time. He was glad he got to feed the fellows who worked at
the construction. They had finished shunting boulders onto the site, but
even in this cold they were required to lift and set, plumb and point.
They got little relief from the cold.

 The Home Guard guessed they were building yet larger barracks, as if
the numbers of the force might swell sometime soon. Or perhaps
warehouses for the defensive artillery supposedly under development.
During a thaw, a steep roof was framed and shingled; when the snows
returned, the interior was roughed in at a rapid rate. Before long a
unionist cleric, his ceremonial garments hidden beneath heavy fur robes,
appeared on its steps. With smoking urns and hallowed gestures he
signaled the Unnamed God, and the unfinished place was consecrated as a
basilica.

 The basilica was more or less functional by Lurlinemas. True, the pagan
cult of Lurline, the sprite said by some to have founded Oz, was out of
favor; few but illiterate country folk paid obeisance to Lurline
anymore. But the celebration of that old holiday was still popular.
Lurlinism had been quietly absorbed into the common culture, not least
because the cash tills splashed with money during the festive season.

 Lurlinemas made a welcome distraction from the anxiety about leadership
that seemed still to grip Oz, even though the Wizard was now gone half a
year. Holiday presents came in on all sides for everyone but Liir. He
had prepared a story about his parents' fierce devotion to unionism and
their rejection of the heathen custom, but he didn't need to lie: no one
asked him about the absence of gifts by his bunk. His mates received
parcels in gilt paper, silly trinkets, useful clothes, small wallets of
cash scented with cloves. He remembered the time Nor had given him the
tail of her gingerbread mouse, and his mouth watered, but he swallowed
it down.

 The basilica was large enough to hold nearly a thousand at a time, so
everyone got to attend the strictly unionist service on Lurlinemas. Liir
saw Commander Cherrystone in the front.

 A visiting chaplain with an ungainly flapping lip pulled himself into
the pulpit and intoned the beginning of a homily. The sung petition
petered out into a tirade against the loose morals of the day. Most of
the soldiers went instantly to sleep, propping one another up on the
benches, but Liir still had had so little exposure to homiletics that he
sat straight up and listened. The preacher, perhaps sensing that someone
midway down the room on the left was actually paying attention, began to
improve.

 The minister gripped the edges of the lectern and swayed sideways. "At
every stage, even in the decorous and seemly home that the army provides
you here, weird rumors of magical uprisings spring up! Like weevils in
the wheat, like maggots in the rump roast!" Either his raised voice or
the mention of magic stirred the morning crowd awake.

 In order to challenge the blasphemous apocrypha, the minister repeated
some stories being told and retold about town. "Magic's appeal is sheer
pfaithism: the pleasure faith that attracts by the glitter of its
surface," he railed. "Change a fish into a farthingale? Or a feather
duster? All distraction! All sleight of skin! But change a fish into a
fish fillet and feed your hungry mother: now, that's a magic we can
applaud: the magic of human charity!"

 Liirwas ready to applaud. Who wouldn't? But no one else stirred, so he
settled his hands back in his lap.

 "Urban legends; they spring up when times are grim," continued the
homilist. "That Ozma will return to govern the humble! That little toast
roundlets spread with herbed goat cheese will fall in the desert and
feed the starving! That Horned Hogs, in sacrificing themselves, will
confer a magical immunity to residents of Southstairs and help them to
survive their confinement!!"

 Liir nearly jumped out of his seat.

 "No, no," continued the minister. "The Ozma kidnapped years ago is dead
in an unmarked grave, and her bones are halfway to dust. Toast roundlets
don't fall in the desert unless you're in the final delirium of
starvation, and they don't taste of much even then. Horned Hogs, when
they die in Southstairs, are carted to Paupers' Field, and their corpses
burned. Nothing of them remains, not a jot of magical comfort for any of
the denizens of Southstairs. Better that prisoners should turn their
wretched hearts to the Unnamed God, and beg forgiveness for even
imagining such a farrago of faith!"

 Paupers' Field, then. Liir committed it to memory. But he listened to
the minister's address to the end, in case there was more to learn. The
words rolled on, sonorously and as buoying, in their way, as the winds
had been, the one night that Liir had ventured on the broomstick.

 At the close of the service, Liir bravely pushed forward and touched
the minister on the sleeve. The man--older than he'd appeared from
below--turned wearily to look at Liir.

 They exchanged a few words. Liir asked for instruction in unionism.
He'd been moved by the remarks. He wondered aloud if escaping Kiamo Ko
the way he did, even at the cost of Elphaba's death, had been the
Unnamed God's way of getting Liir's attention. But the minister said, a
bit too sharply, "Why? Have you seen or do you know of magic being done?
Here? On the premises perhaps? Are you being tempted by the wrong
forces? Explain, boy!" Liir was alarmed and shrank back. Foolish to have
identified himself so! Shaking his head, he excused himself from the
conversation and left.

 It was too cold to venture out of the Guard yard. But the weeks would
pass, the sun would wheel. When the worst of the season had slunk by, he
would think up an excuse to skulk out to Paupers' Field. Learn what he
could.

 

 THE DAY DID COME,though not soon enough, and Liir made the trip
swiftly, and only a little illegally. (Initially he had invented an
ailing mother and a crippled father, and after he'd been in the Home
Guard six months, he was given leave to carry them a few coins and a
loaf of bread.) Apparently, though, his invention of the story of magic
Horned Hogs had worked too well. The legend had spread through the urban
population like news of a scandal, and pilgrims had begun to mass at the
pyre of the Horned Hogs. The crematorium at Paupers' Field had had to be
abandoned and demolished. The squatters whose tents had sprung up on the
dreadful spot knew little of what had recently gone on there, and
nothing of Horned Hogs, or if an escaped convict from Southstairs had
been discovered.

 Still, returning to base, Liir found himself less than distraught. If
Nor had really had the invention and courage, even after those years, to
secret herself out of Southstairs sandwiched between two slaughtered
Hogs, she'd have managed somehow to find a warm place for the winter.
Their reunion was ahead somewhere, waiting for them.

 He would have faith in the Unnamed God, who even now was probably
ordaining the right time and place in some secret holy plan. All Liir
had to do was bide his time, do his work, peel his potatoes, keep his
nose clean and his eyes open, and the UG, as Liir's barracks mates
termed it, would tell him what to do next, and when to do it.

 As to his hopes for helping Princess Nastoya--it wasn't going to happen.
You didn't learn magic in the army. He had nothing to say to her, no way
to give comfort. Probably she was dead already, anyway.

 

 THERE WERE NEW HABITSto examine in the privacy of his bunk. Self
amusement was the least of it: operating solo beneath the rough sheets
was risky business in a dormitory setting, and his mates were always
alert to the cues that one of their number was finding himself hot and
bothered, and doing something about it.

 No, his secret distractions were acts of memory, flights of doubt, even
at times a feeble attempt at prayer. (He wondered why the chaplain spent
so much time discoursing on the value of prayer to the enlisted man, yet
never gave instruction in how prayer ought to be conducted.)

 Deep in the funk given off by a dozen young men dozing in nearby bunks,
Liir itemized his attributes, and considered how they were being
heightened and strengthened by life in the barracks.

 Rectitude, for one. Propriety. Custody of the senses!--that was how he
(mostly) resisted masturbation.

 Also, Liir found he was developing a capacity for respect. The mark of
a soldier, of course. Back at Kiamo Ko, he hadn't been respectful--he'd
been ignorant and scared. There was a difference.

 The army thrived on itsregulae . Precision, obedience, and rightness of
thinking. Had Elphaba possessed any of those virtues? When she'd been
sloppy with emotion, vivid with rage or grief--which was most of the
time--she hadn't kept to a schedule. Coffee at midnight, waking up the
others by slamming the larder door looking for cream! Lunch at sunset,
bread crumbs on the harpsiclavier keys. Pelting through the gates of the
castle, in any weather, at any hour, no matter if Liir had just laid out
a couple of coddled eggs for her. Studying the night through, getting
excited, reading things from that--thatbook of hers--out loud, to hear how
they went, to hear how they sounded. Waking Chistery on his perch at the
top of the wardrobe. Impetuous and selfish, totally selfish. How had he
not seen it?

 She was obedient--yes--to herself. Though what good had that done her--or
anyone else? So far as he could remember--and he spent some wakeful
nights examining his recollections carefully--she had rarely asked
anything of Liir except that he keep himself safe.

 And certainly she'd never asked him to be obedient. How was one to
learn obedience unless one was thwacked into line? He'd been left alone,
to roam the dusty corridors with Nor and her brothers. He'd picked up
reading almost by accident. He'd been clothed by Sarima's sisters, that
clot of spinsters who had nothing better to do but brood and bitch.
Now,there was a group of responsible adults, he thought, though he found
he couldn't actually remember their faces.

 Still, he reminded himself, stiffly, to be kind. What did Elphaba know
of child rearing? When he listened to his companions gossiping about
their mothers--those cozy, pincushiony mamas, who never cuffed a child
without a follow-up cuddle--he knew that nothing about Elphaba smacked of
the maternal. Maybe this was all the proof he needed that she wasn't his
mother, couldn't have been. She had had lots of power, in her own way,
but she had no more motherly instinct than a berserk rhino.

 Even a berserk rhino can bear a child, his deeper voice reminded him,
till he told it to shut up.

 

 MONTH AFTER MONTH,his days were spent in drilling. In learning to
shoot. How to run holding a rifle without tripping on it and spearing
himself. How to march in formation. (He didn't learn horsemanship, as
the only soldiers permitted to ride were those who had brought their own
mounts with them when they enlisted.)

 How to wear his hair saucily, to thrill the maidens on the pavement.

 How and when to salute, though not, precisely, why.

 How to peel potatoes faster.

 What was curiously obscure, Liir thought, was the nature of the menace
that the Home Guard was formed to protect against. The commanding
officers didn't reveal much about possible threats. When at ease in
their dormitories or in the canteen, the enlisted men discussed the
question.

 Some felt the Home Guard existed to provide mortal comfort to the
citizens of the Emerald City. Should the rabble ever rise up, should the
denizens of Southstairs break free--hell, should a mighty comet thud into
the Palace and burn it to blazes--the Home Guard would be right there,
ready to restore order.

 Others argued that the Home Guard wasn't a municipal police force but a
defensive army. Before the Wizard's departure from the Palace, the
province of Munchkinland had declared its autonomy as a Free State.
Since the Emerald City's main water supply, Restwater, fell wholly
within Munchkinland's borders--to say nothing of the great arable reaches
that fed the capital of Oz--hostilities were conducted primarily on the
diplomatic level. It was inconceivable that the EC would retaliate
against the upstart government in Center Munch; a full-scale civil war
in Oz would imperil both the water and food supplies of the capital.

 But what if Munchkinland raised an army? If such an army invaded the
Emerald City, the Home Guard had to be ready to toss them out on their
asses. So the drills were constant, the defenses shored up, and it was
said that spies were kept busy trying to find out just what
Munchkinlanders were up to.

 "Spies," said Liir. It sounded lovely and sexy and dangerous.

 Still, he supposed that it was good policy for the enlisted men not to
know the precise reasons for their constant drilling. The information
belonged to those wise enough to interpret it, and Liir knew this didn't
include him.

 

 HE LEARNED A LITTLE MOREwhen he and five others were singled out of a
lineup one morning and told to wash and clothe themselves in their dress
uniforms. "Palace detail," said the commanding officer.

 Palace detail! How smart! Hewas moving up. Nose to the grindstone, eyes
on the prize: it worked.

 When Liir and his mates reported for duty, he realized why he'd been
chosen. The detail involved six trim young men of identical height and
build: two blond heads, two chestnut, two charcoal. Liir was one of the
charcoals.

 They were to accompany Lady Glinda and Lord Chuffrey into the House of
Protocol, said the commander. There, the well-placed couple was being
inducted in the ceremonial Order of the Right. The Lady Glinda was being
thanked for her period of service to the country, and her husband for
his own contributions. It was a high honor for the soldiers of the Home
Guard to attend this ancient privilege of the just getting their just
deserts, said the commander. So smarten up, top form, eyes front, chin
high, buttocks in, shoulders back. The usual.

 With his riding crop he smacked one of the blond heads. "You think this
is the stables, you dolt? Get rid of that chewy pulp or I'll knock your
teeth out your behind."

 It is something to be charcoal-haired, anyway, thought Liir. Isn't it?

 He'd see Lady Glinda again. That much was for sure. If he had no
further campaign with her, at least he had a little history. And who
knew? As the throne minister of Oz, perhaps she followed all things;
maybe she'd remembered his quest for Nor, and had information for him
that Cherrystone had never heard.

 At the Palace, Commander Cherrystone caught his eye and winked. Liir
and his five mates made a sort of human wallpaper, dazzling in their
white sartorials and whitened boots, gold plumes splashing from their
half-helmets, standing at the head of the aisle.

 Lady Glinda walked a step or two ahead of her husband, greeting the
cheering crowds with a rolling movement of her scepter. Her skin was
firm and her chin up, and her eyes dazzled as they had done the first
time Liir had seen her. She wore antique mettanite struts, and a tiara
of cobalts and diamonds, and she advanced in her own warm front of
orange blossom fog. Her face was trained on the crowd, giving them love,
and when her eyes passed over Liir and he gulped and willed her to
recognize him, she didn't.

 Commander Cherrystone followed, pushing Lord Chuffrey in a wheeled
chair. The nobleman's head was fastened peculiarly on his neck, as if it
had come unfastened and been reattached by someone inadequate to the
task. Chuffrey drooled on his epaulets. Attending like a nursemaid with
impeccable references, Commander Cherrystone discreetly wiped away the
spittle.

 The ceremony was abbreviated due to Lord Chuffrey's obvious ill health.
Perhaps he was dying and they were rushing through this convention as a
thanks for all the good he and his bride had done the government. Which
in Lord Chuffrey's case, if Liir understood the testimonial talks
correctly, seemed to be a canny invention in the field of fiscal
accounting that had helped the government avoid bankruptcy some years
back. In Lady Glinda's case, it was her dazzling throne minister-ship,
over all too soon, but the rewards to be reaped for years to come, and
so on, and so on.

 Glinda seemed to have learned how to control her blushing in public, or
perhaps she just wasn't listening to the speeches.

 Toward the end, when Liir's green eyes had begun to glaze over a bit, a
rustle and hush in the peplums and fozzicles of the gentry caused Liir
to turn ever so slightly to a side door. Supported on both sides by a
pretty maiden, in came the Scarecrow himself. He looked greatly
inebriated, or troubled by muscular atrophy; his limbs were akimbo and
his eyes rolled like hard-boiled eggs on the spin.

 At first Liir thought it was a joke, like a Fool at a sacred pageant.
But the cornets trilled, and the great and good deigned to applaud. The
Scarecrow gave a genuflection of such profound clumsiness that several
of the Home Guard snorted. The Scarecrow said nothing, just waved, and
Lady Glinda curtseyed, a cataract of tulle bunching in front and
frothing around to the back.

 The Scarecrow retreated. Liir felt cold and mean. The Scarecrow had
been an obvious imposter--nothing like the Scarecrow Liir himself had
walked with along the roads from Kiamo Ko. Couldn't they see it? Or were
they complicit? Or maybe, in their eyes, one Scarecrowdid look like
every other Scarecrow.

 The whereabouts of the real Scarecrow hardly bore imagining, now that
Liir had seen the depths of Southstairs. Or perhaps, just perhaps,
cannier than he'd ever let on, the real Scarecrow had managed to
disappear himself somewhere. Good luck to him, in prison or in hiding.

 Liir didn't pay attention to current affairs, generally, or not those
beyond the intrigues within the barracks; he thought it beneath him to
follow the details of how the civilian world amused itself. Was Lady
Glinda stepping down willingly or had she been crowded out by some
coalition of antagonists? The question occurred to him, but in
dismissing it as meaningless, finally, Liir felt the first flush of
adult apathy. It was welcome. About time.

 At any rate, to be invisible to Lady Glinda and unrecognized by the
next hollow head of Oz--it brought back to Liir the truth of his
isolation. He wouldn't approach Glinda for news of Nor; he wouldn't
stand the insult of having to reintroduce himself.

 At length, the soldiers were shown a side room where they could nibble
at dry crackers while Lord Chuffrey and Lady Glinda were received at a
luncheon. To avoid possible stains on their dress sartorials, the
soldiers were forbidden to drink anything but water. Liir was pissed at
serving as a pretty accessory for Lady Glinda. He refused even the water.

 When they saw the couple back to its carriage, Liir didn't even bother
to let his eyes sweep over them. Should her eyes pick him out, now that
the job was done, let her address him. But she didn't.

 

 AYEAR PASSED, another. Nothing was the same, year by year, but little
was different, either.

 He found himself watching how the men consorted together, realizing
long after it had begun that this was effectively his first experience
of male behavior. Kiamo Ko had been unrelievedly female, at least in the
adult generation; the shadowy presence of Fiyero, long lost husband and
lover and father, was real but indistinct. Liir had learned nothing of
how men speak, or joke, or trust, or fail to trust one another.

 In the service, there were games, and Liir played hard and well. Formal
clubs and socials, and he attended--stiffly. His work assignments gave
order to his days and brought some satisfaction. He became known as a
good listener, though this was mostly because he was unwilling to spill
the beans about his quirky upbringing, and listening was easier than
chatting.

 Liir grew accustomed to his privacy. When furloughs were granted, he
chose not to take advantage of them. Once he was invited to join a
fellow cadet on a trip home to the family farm somewhere north of Shiz,
in Gillikin. Liir had been tempted to accept. But the night before they
were to leave, the cadet had a few too many. He began to carol about his
doddery old daddums and the good little woman who'd married him and on
and on and so forth.

 "They're so proud of me. It's the best thing anyone in the family has
ever done--to be selected a member of the Home Guard!"

 Peculiarly undistinguished lot, Liir supposed.

 Oh, said the cadet, but his mother's apple trickle could bring tears to
the eye! Indeed, it brought tears to his, but Liir's eyes were stones.
The next morning he told the headachy cad to go on without him; he'd
changed his mind.

 "You don't know what you're missing," said the cadet.

 "I'd like to keep it that way."

 The fellow returned with a sizable chunk of apple trickle wrapped in a
checked cloth, and it was good. Too good, in a way; Liir had never
tasted anything so wonderful. He resented every tasty crumb.

 A few weeks later, when a commander's rifle had gone missing from the
rack, Liir made an appointment to see the commander privately. He said
he knew that the code of honor required him to speak. Deftly Liir laid
suspicion on the shoulders of the Gillikinese cadet. The lad was hauled
off into solitary for a few days. When he had not confessed in a week,
he was stripped of his uniform and excused from service, dishonorably.

 He never made it home, someone said later; he killed himself on the
way. Hung himself in someone's back field, strung up on a black-trunk elm.

 Nonsense, thought Liir; that's just army gossip. Who would bother to
learn such specific details of a suicide of someone so patently soft and
regrettable?

 He sat in chapel. "Nothing convinces like conviction," thundered the
minister, warning against softness, which when you came to think about
it seemed like the UG's way of approving of Liir's maneuver. His own
lack of remorse about it seemed authoritative in and of itself. When the
rifle was found elsewhere, merely misplaced in the wrong locker, the
entire company simply avoided the subject. No one came after Liir to ask
him to justify his previous statements. It seemed no one wanted to be
caught in the wrong.

 A capacity for interiority in the growing adult is threatened by the
temptation to squander that capacity ruthlessly, to revel in hollowness.
The syndrome especially plagues anyone who lives behind a mask. An
Elephant in her disguise as a human princess, a Scarecrow with painted
features, a glittering tiara under which to glow and glide in anonymous
glamour. A witch's hat, a Wizard's showbiz display, a cleric's stole, a
scholar's gown, a soldier's dress sartorials. A hundred ways to duck the
question: how will I live with myself now that I know what I know?

 The next time Lurlinemas rolled around, Liir volunteered for solitary
guard duty in the watchtower that capped the great chapel. He wouldn't
agree to being spelled so he could spend an hour at the holiday dinner.
"I determine my own duty and I perform it," he said to the cadet
assigned to replace him. The cadet was only too happy to sidle back to
the festivities. Liir took pleasure in dumping out, untasted, the
tankard of ale snuck in to thank him.

 

 ANOTHER YEAR,or was it two? At length the day came when Liir's company
learned it was shipping out. But to where?

 "You don't need to know," said the sergeant from Detail Desk, looking
over his notes. "Your mail will be forwarded."

 "Is this a... litary moment?" asked someone, trying to speak stoutly.

 "You get a night on the town before you go, six chits each. A
court-martial for you and a fine for your family if you don't come back
by the morning call of the roll," they were told.

 Liir had no family to be fined, and no one to shame with a
court-martial, but he was beginning to have enough of a sense of
propriety not to want to be ashamed of himself. And since the months had
become years, and the Home Guard was an institution that honored
tradition and resisted innovation, he had lost sight of how much he had
grown up. He was old enough to have a couple of beers, goddamn it.
Because who the hell knew what was coming next?

 He had to borrow civilian clothes from mates--a pair of leggings, a
tunic, a waistcoat--for he'd long outgrown the rags he'd arrived in. He'd
outgrown everything but the old cape, in which he had no intention of
swanning about, not in front of his mates, nor anyone else.

 He kept the broom and cape in a locker, away from prying eyes. He no
longer put his face in the musky pleats of the cape's broadcloth, to
harvest piercing memories. He didn't want to think of the past. Memories
of Nor were pressed flat as envelopes, juiceless, between the folds of
the cape, interleaved with memories of Dorothy, Chistery, Nanny--and
oldest, Elphaba. They were of no use to him now. Indeed, they were a
hindrance. Neither did he dream of his old associates--he could scarcely
call them family, or friends--nor of anyone else.

 The fellows who made it a habit of jolly-follying knew where to head
for a good time. A tavern, they said, in Scrumpet Square: known for
cheese-and-bacon temptos and even cheesier women. The floor was
sawdusted, the beer was watered, the elf who served the drinks was
neutered, and the tone agreeably disreputable. The place proved to be as
advertised, and packed to the rafters, as the news of a Mission had
spread. Common knowledge held that departing soldiers were good at
loosening their wallets, their trousers, and sometimes their tongues, so
an assortment of bamboozlers, shady ladies, and spies were fighting the
buckos for the attention of the barkeep.

 After so long in something like solitary confinement--solitary because
hewas solitary now, by choice and by nature--Liir found the exercise
unsettling but not appalling. He tried to relax. He prayed to the UG
that the spirit of relaxation should break the yoke of tension that rode
across his shoulders here and now and, come to think of it, always.

 Everyone wanted to know where they were going, and why. In all the
theories that were shouted from table to table, one of them had to be
right, but which one? An uprising among what remained of the Quadlings
down there in Qhoyre? No--a final decision, and about time too, to invade
Munchkinland and reannex it? No, no, nothing so exciting--only a boring
public works project, building a dam across one of the vales of the
Scalps, to create a reservoir deep enough to supply the Emerald City and
decrease its dependence on foreign water. Or yet again no: no: no: no:
something more wonderful than that. The cave of Ozma has been
discovered, and she is to come back and rule our Oz, and the idiotic
Scarecrow can go stuff himself. Hah! Good one: a Scarecrow stuffing himself.

 Liir hunched into his borrowed jacket and tried to look as if he was
expecting someone. His mates weren't avoiding him, exactly; they knew
they'd be stuck with him for some time to come. They were spilling over
with chat and banter on all sides, from all comers. Liir watched pockets
being picked, groins being stroked, apron strings unraveling, beer
spilling, candles guttering, mice cowering in the shadows, and the elf
scampering almost weightlessly about with trays of beer glasses.

 When he came to whisk away Liir's glass for a refill, he said, "Three
Ozpence, guv; and how've you been keeping since Southstairs?"

 Liir's head whipped. When Glinda hadn't recognized him for anything but
his function, he had hated her for it. Now he hadn't recognized this
elf--and he'd only ever seen one before! Or was that a good enough excuse?

 He found the name on his tongue. "Jibbidee?"

 "The same. Can't stay to chew the fat. Money's sloshing in the till."

 "How'd you get out? I thought no one got out--"

 "No one? Hah. You did, didn't you? You weren't meant to, I think. And
so did that girl you were looking for, if the stories they told were
true. Folks gets out, boy-britches. Many different ways. Sneaks out,
flies out, folks their way out. Myself, it was bribery. Once upon a time
I recognized a ring too unique to have found its way to the Under-mayor
legally. Chyde would've slaughtered me, but elves are hard to pin down."
He leaped up in the air like a figure filled with helium; it was true.
Elves had little weight. It's what made them so easy to kill, if you
could catch them. "So now I'm Upside, enslaved here to the shackles of
righteous employment, too tired to think straight, and Chyde is free as
a bee down Southstairs, out of mortal company, light, and beauty. Which
of us wins the liberty sweepstakes?"

 He skirled away without waiting for an answer, but when he came back to
drop the next beer on the table, he added, "You're not one I'd have
spotted for the military, you."

 "Hidden depths."

 "Hidden shallows, I think." But Jibbidee wasn't being mean. He grinned.
Elves were like house cats that knew how to smile; the effect was
unnerving. "That beer's on me."

 "I inshist--"

 "Don't bother. You've got the welfare of the land on your shoulders.
All I have to do is keep awake till last call, and then mop up the
vomit." He twitched his ears--which looked in considerably better shape
than they once had. "I heard about how the girl you were hunting for was
said to have escaped, but not how you did. They're still talking about
it down there. Confounded ‘em all."

 Liir scowled; he didn't like to remember flying. The experience had
been grand, and a sense of airsickness had obtained only after the fact.

 "Did you ever find the girl?"

 "I found out how to mind my own business."

 The elf didn't take the offense Liir had intended him to. Cheerily
enough, he riposted, "You're the rare one, then, who knows so well the
line between your business and anyone else's." He bounded off.

 Liir drank up and felt the beer rise in him--an agreeable and
uncustomary heaviness. He imagined he could sit there all night,
shoulders hunched, watching the circus of human life at a high pitch.
After a half an hour, though, he had to go piss it out.

 On his way back to the table he lurched against a soldier, who turned
at the thump. Liir recognized him. It was the guy who had told him how
to apply to the Home Guard all that time ago--the fellow on the gooseball
pitch who'd sheltered with him during a hailstorm. Imagining Liir had
approached him intentionally, the soldier said, "Oh, it's you."

 "Well, it is," said Liir. "All these years, and never thanked you for
the skinny on how to get in."

 "If you're looking for advice on how to get out, I'm afraid it's too
late now," said the fellow. He was sleek and rangy both, with hair the
color of clarified butter, swept long across the brow and clipped at the
nape. Even in this welter and swelter he was wearing officer's code
stripes on the shoulders of his smart civilian tightcoat. A Minor
Menacier, by the look of it.

 "Liir," said Liir.

 "Some do. They can't help themselves," said the petty officer. "Leer,"
he explained. "How much have you had to drink?"

 "Not too much enough of."

 "You ought to sit down. You don't want to throw up on my threads."

 The Menacier commandeered a small table from a couple of floozies.
"Trism," he said, by way of introduction. "Trism bon Cavalish."

 "Liir." He never said "Liir Thropp," though that was his closest
approximation to a real name. Formally he'd enrolled as Liir Ko--taking
the second part of Kiamo Ko as his surname. Now, though, he didn't offer
even that. The Minor Menacier seemed not to notice, however.

 "Do you know where's we're going?"

 "I'm staying put. But if I knew where you were going and I told you,
that'd be treason." He took a long pull on his beer. "No, I don't know."

 They studied the crowd in a complacent silence as if they'd been
friends for years. Liir didn't want to ask questions of Trism's origins,
lest Trism ask him the same. So he asked Trism what a Minor Menacier's
duties consisted of. Maybe he'd one day get to be one. Day. A Minor
Menacier. Someday. Pluck a duck, the beer was telling.

 "Development of Defense," said Trism. "That I can tell you."

 "Which means what? New sword technique?"

 "No, no. I'm in husbandry."

 Liir didn't know what to say to that; he wasn't sure what husbandry was.

 "Animal husbandry," Trism explained, though in the noise of the bar,
Liir couldn't tell if he said Animal or animal, the sentient or the
nonsentient creature. "Training for military uses," said Trism at last.
"Are you slow, or are you falling in love with me?"

 "It's the beer," said Jibbidee, swooping down again. "I'm not sure I'd
fill him up with any more, begging your pardon, unless you want to
husband him home."

 "Sorry; it is the beer," said Liir, suddenly queasy. "I think I need
some air."

 "Can you manage on your own?" By the tone of Trism's voice he certainly
hoped so but courteously he helped Liir up and loaned a strong arm.
"Make way, make way; hail hail, the prince of ale," he cried. Liir felt
like that old weevily Scarecrow he'd seen at the Palace. His legs had
contradictory intentions.

 More or less tumbling out a side door, they were almost plowed into by
a carriage careering down the alley from Scrumpet Square. It pulled up
to let out more custom. "Whoa, your country needs you, don't go slipping
under the wheels of this fancy rig," said Trism, hauling Liir back and
holding him up.

 The door flew open and a man in a fashionable dark brocaded vest jacket
descended. "All my small life that stays small and separate comes out
now's time to see me drunkish," said Liir, "not fair play, that." The
smart figure was Shell.

 "Oh ho," said Shell, in a merry mood. "I knew you'd turn up one day!
So, laddio, you're doing the town? Out soliciting officers, by the look
of it? That's my boy."

 "I'm a Guardsman," said Liir, straightening up more or less
successfully. "Ow."

 "Watch your head. You may need it one day. I wondered where you'd gone!
Wicked old Chyde was absolutely flummoxed. He'd no idea what happened to
you. Assumed you'd slipped and drowned in one of the canals, but then
suicides and other such big shit usually silts up against the grates at
one end of the line or the other, and you never did. Somebody said you'd
melted, and sifted right through the sieve! Ha! That was a good one."

 "I was looking for Nor," said Liir, trying to hang on to any small knot
of reality he could pinch.

 "Sure, and I remember that well. She'd snaked her way out somehow,
hadn't she? And then word of her turned up, now where was it--?"

 "I shall leave you to your reunion," said Trism, starting to detach
himself.

 "Oh, I wouldn't dream of parting chums," said Shell. "We're only young
once, lads; make the most of it. And tomorrow you go toodle-oo, I hear.
No, I can't stay and chatter; I've work to achieve in the next hour, now
that lips are oiled enough to speak what I want to hear. But I'm talking
strategy to the armed forces: I'll save my breath for kissing, or
kissing up. Off you go, boys. If you want to borrow my trap and get home
in a hurry, just see it's sent right back. I was young once, I remember.
Go ahead."

 "Sir!" snapped Trism. "I am an officer of the Home Guard!"

 "And I'm the wicked snitch of the west," said Shell. "Oh well, I was
trying to be useful. Not my strong suit. Driver, an hour, and don't have
too much yourself; I don't want to end up in hospital. I'm to be back at
the Palace by midnight for fun and frolic if I can pay with the coin
they require."

 "Nor!" said Liir. Saying the very word, after all this time, had made
him come round. "Where is she?"

 "Am I your personal secretary? I don't know. Was it Colwen Grounds in
Munchkinland?"

 "Couldn't have been; that's a hostile state," intervened Trism, bulking up.

 "You'rein a hostile state, by the look of it. Don't sneer at me, Minor
Menacier. I get around; that's my job. But no, it wasn't there. Maybe it
was Shiz. Was it Shiz? I can't remember exactly where. Don't pester me,
Liir: I can see you're going to pester me. I have to go."

 "Shell!" said Liir, but the man was gone in a snap of cloak and a slam
of the door.

 "Well," said Trism. "I'm not seeing you home, if that's what you're
thinking."

 "I am thinking no such thing. Though that coach would have been useful
right now."

 "I wouldn't take the loan of a boot from the likes of him. Bounder.
I'll hail a cab or a street chair for you."

 They walked to the front of the pub. Scrumpet Square was bright with
torchlight. While Trism hailed a driver, and the cab was being brought
round, Liir trained his eyes on some scraps of graffiti written with
drippy paint on a public wall. He tried to bring them into focus as a
way to sober up. In four different hands, applied at four different
opportunities, to judge by the aging of the text, the wall read

 ELPHIE LIVES!

 OZMA LIVES!

 THEWIZARD LIVES!

 And then

 EVERYONE LIVES BUT US.

 Trism dumped him in the cab and paid for it, and gave the driver
directions. Then Trism disappeared back into the pub before Liir could
even thank him. So Liir settled back against the moldy cushions.

 Everyone lives but us.

 Nor was somewhere in Shiz. Shiz. Where was that?

 He would find her. He should find her. He should leap from the cab
right now and go find her. He tried to sit up, but the world beyond the
isinglass windows was unsettled and rolled about as if on the backs of a
school of earthquakes. When he was deposited at the barracks, his feet
found their way to his bunk while his head tried not to hurt, and also
tried to remember what was so important.

 

 HE WAS HALFWAY PACKEDnext morning when he recalled Shell's comment
about Nor. Through the sawteeth of his headache he grappled with the
question. What to do? Packing, he paused over the cape--leave it behind,
leave all the past filed in its pleats? He didn't want to deal with that
decision now, while his head hurt. Easier to pack the old thing. Easier
to bind the broom's head in a cloth so it would look less womanly, and
tie the thing to the satchel laces. Postpone chucking these things out
for good. Any minute now inspiration would strike. An idea would form,
and as if by magic the courage to follow that idea would flare up. If
only his head wouldn't pound so!

 Now's a good time for an idea, he said, as he joined his mates in
formation to receive orders.

 Commander Cherrystone had not been informed about his own new
assignment, it appeared, until that very dawn; he arrived at the head of
the transport column with an unpinned collar and crumbs in his trim,
silvering beard. His expression was thunder. He delivered his
instructions in a throttled tone. No one dared ask a question. When the
chaplain arrived, Commander Cherrystone didn't join in the public
atonements delivered under open skies to the Unnamed God, in exchange
for the success of their mission. Whatever it might turn out to be.

 "We leave in an hour," said the Commander.

 So, oh, what next? If only he had more oomph this morning! Or if he had
a place to rest his head till the screech of today calmed down.

 He finished clearing his trunk. Unlike all the other men, he had no
private books, no mezzotints of family grandees, no clutches of letters
from admonitory father or teary mother or whispery girl back home. He
was bereft of the more traditional impedimenta, and determined to be
proud of it.

 He waited in the yard beside the basilica. What did he take of his mock
parents? If Fiyero had been his dad, really, Liir had got nothing from
him but a possible half-sister. No model of comportment, no word of
wisdom, no wallet fattened with funds, no blessing.

 If Elphaba had been his mother, he got something more--that much was
sure. But what? She had acted to pervert fate, to interrupt and bludgeon
history into shape--to topple the wonderful Wizard of Oz, no less--and
what good had it gotten her? She was fierce and futile at everything she
attempted. What kind of a lesson was that?

 She hadn't talked to him much. Only in a cast-off manner. One lunchtime
she'd seethed, more to herself than to him; "It isn't whether you do it
well or ill, it's that you do it all," she'd said, dumping her attempt
at poached eggs on the floor and hurrying back to the books and charms
in her tower. That was her legacy, and it didn't add up to much.

 So perhaps he should consider the absence of good advice a kind of
direction from the universe: Follow where you are led, and take it from
there. Maybe fate intends to lead you to Nor. It's gotten you this far,
hasn't it?

 It was easier to be passive, easier on his brain anyway. His cohorts
gathered for departure while he congratulated himself for sorting this out.

 And it was indisputably thrilling to fall into formation to the punch
of snare drums. The men squared their shoulders and became Men. The wind
obliged by whipping the banners and emblems: it was all so glorious and
immediate.

 The four departing companies of the Home Guard were now colloquially
named the Seventh Spear, after some magic weapon in a children's fable
that Liir had never heard told. The convoy marched in formation through
the smell of sweet morning loaves, as Emerald City shopkeepers were
unshuttering their windows and washing down the paving stones.

 What a joy there was in movement! Liir hadn't realized how petty he'd
become, worrying daily about the gloss on his boots, the snap in his
retort. The Guard's culture had trained him into thinking that a
well-brushed smile and a groomed chin were somehow vital to the
preservation of the nation.

 He saw the Emerald City--perhaps for the last time?--as if for the first.
And how fitting it seemed that the Seventh Spear was shafting its way
through the capital toward Westgate, the portal through which Liir had
first made his approach. They marched past the polished half-domes and
buttresses of the Wizard's Palace--still called that, even now. The sun
came out and glazed the marble; one could hardly look at it. A giant
broody hen. From this angle, a distance north: the grimmer spectacle of
Southstairs, lurking behind the hunched shoulders of its walls.

 Everywhere else--on this boulevard, anyway--the allure of healthy
commerce. Cafés catering, at this hour, to merchants on their way to
their warehouses. Stalls of books, pottery, feathery remnants to adorn
hats and hems. A display, arrayed under a bentlebranch arbor, of several
dozen tribal carpets imported from the Vinkus, suggesting that the West
was trading with the capital these days. And floral silks from
Gillikinese artisans, sprays of lavender and lime, to upholster
furniture in better parlors. One merchant had hung an entire chandelier,
chase-worked mettanite with crystal pendants, from the bicep of a
healthy oak, and he had arranged below it a dining area for
eighteen--table, chairs, Dixxi House porcelain settings and silver
service, with linen napkins folded to look like swans, one at each place
setting.

 That those who headed the nation could enjoy their meals in such
luxury!--the men marched with firmer step. The vitality of the capital
gave life to their cause.

 The Seventh Spear turned a corner, continuing toward Westgate. Liir
recognized the warehouse district through which he'd passed with Dorothy
and her friends. The convoy paused while Commander Cherrystone
negotiated some last-minute business with a wine merchant, and the
soldiers were allowed to fall out of formation. Bleary from last night's
mistakes, Liir wandered to the brighter side of the street. He propped
himself against the wall of an abandoned granary of some sort. Putting
one heel against the wall, he closed his eyes and lifted his face to get
some sun.

 The warmth of the walls behind him, the pleasure of being between
moments of his own history... s skittery mind indulged in a waking dream.
His thoughts wandered up the cracked plaster walls of the corn-house. It
was as if he were looking down at himself from the window on the second
level. That's me down there, that young soldier, anthracite-haired,
trim, smart enough, having his moment of rest... w handsome a figure he
managed to seem, from this vantage point: shoulders acceptably broad,
the windblown hair on his scalp, the knee thrust forward. A soldier
doing the work of the empire: a good guy.

 Then the focus of his attentions backed up--for that fragment of an
instant in which a revery implies eternity--and Liir had the sense that
the young soldier at street level was out of sight again, and out of
mind; and the two people who might have been looking out at him from
some private aerie above had turned their attention back to each other,
lovingly.

 Must be the sun! Must be the beer! Filthy slutty mind he had, after all.

 "Straighten out!" barked Cherrystone, and they did, and he did.

 

 THROUGHWESTGATE,they turned to the south. The lads knew the habits of
the sun enough to be able to tell that much. They marched as suited the
Commander's whim--more relaxed when in the rural outback, in parade
formation when passing through villages. The companies tented at night,
found the dried lentils and local celery exotic and filling, alternated
hymns of patriotism to Oz with anthems of devotion to the Unnamed God,
and didn't bring out the bawdier ditties until Commander Cherrystone had
retired for the night.

 Fording the Gillikin River, they came to a broad sweep of pebbly waste,
marked here and there by stands of scrub maple and pencilnut. Once they
stopped for water at a kind of oasis, a mauntery of some sort, hoping
that some novices would come scupper for them--lean down to reach the
bucket, and show evidence of some lovely curve beneath their voluminous
habits. But the maunts who supplied some succor were desiccated old
biddies who had no curves to flaunt.

 Liir waited to feel some frisson of recognition--could this have been
the place where he and Elphaba originated? He couldn't decide. Maybe one
mauntery looked just like another. Certainly one maunt and the next
seemed identical twins.

 "If we're going south or east again, wouldn't the Yellow Brick Road
give us better speed?" some wondered. But perhaps the Free State of
Munchkinland hadn't granted the necessary license.

 Another opinion held that since most of the Yellow Brick Road leading
south and east fell within the boundaries of Munchkinland, perhaps the
final destination of the Seventh Spear was the mysterious
west--Kumbricia's Pass, or the Thousand Year Grasslands, or Kvon
Altar--romantic locales, full of intrigue, exoticism, magic, sex.
Everything over the horizon beckoned more temptingly than anything near.

 Crossing into the eastern Vinkus, they continued through the oakhair
forest between Kellswater and Restwater. Fording the Vinkus River, too,
they paused on the escarpment of its southern bank. A dozen miles or
more to the southwest, the Great Kells gave off a faint but redolent
breath of balsam and fir. Nearer, scatterbirches in the lowland meadows
shimmered in their new leaf, like chain mail on skeletons. Several
hundred small grey birds flew by, brazenly low, singing their throats sore.

 It felt as if the world itself were blessing the endeavor when
Commander Cherrystone gave the signal not to head west toward
Kumbricia's Pass, the main route to the vastness of the Vinkus, but
instead to the southeast. They would skirt the mountains and, rounding
them, head south into Quadling Country.

 The where, then, but not the why.

 Why Quadling Country? When the Seventh Spear paused to make camp, the
soldiers shared what they remembered about the southernmost province of
Oz. Quadling Country was your basic muckland. An undifferentiated waste
of bogs and badlands, once widely populated by the Squelchfolk, a marsh
people known for their ruddy complexion and fishy odor. Hadn't they
mostly been eradicated when the Wizard had drained the wetlands in the
hunt for swamp rubies? In the Emerald City you could see Quadling
families from time to time. They were clanny, silent in public, making
little effort to integrate. In the Emerald City they'd cornered the
market on trash removal--all the funnier: trash hauling trash.

 But the two larger cities of Qhoyre and Ovvels: surely something of
them remained? The southern arm of the Yellow Brick Road ended in
Qhoyre, and Ovvels was a nearly impassible distance beyond. A town built
on stilts, Qhoyre. A town whose streets were silted with mud, Ovvels. No
wonder the Seventh Spear's administration had obliged them to include
gum-rubber boots in their packs.

 

 WONDERFUL WEATHER,bracing light, cheery companionship. Now and then a
free-held farm or some nobleman's country estate would welcome the
convoy. A whole stable of milk cows at one, and they had milk to drink,
to pour in their coffee, to splash on their faces; they had milk
puddings, cheese temptos, creamed curd, lake lobster bisque. Who needed
that fancy dining ensemble for sale under the trees in the Emerald City?
The soldiers ate like kings and nodded off under the willow fronds,
sassy and satisfied.

 One day Liir and a couple of pettys were sent to collect fresh water at
the foot of a wooded dale. They paused to rest before starting back with
the filled jugs yoked to their shoulders. Other topics of conversation
having been exhausted, Liir asked his mates, Burny and Ansonby, about
the place of husbandry in the development of new defensive systems for
the Emerald City.

 As it happened, Ansonby and Burny had both flirted briefly with
defensive husbandry. Ansonby had worked in the veterinary arts, and
Burny had helped copy some legal contracts with farmers outside the
Emerald City.

 "It's supposed to be hush-hush, but everyone talks about it," said Ansonby.

 "Not to me," Liir said pointedly.

 "Well, then, I'm not sure it's my place--"

 "Dragons," Burny interrupted. "Smallish flying dragons."

 "Dragons!" said Liir. "Nonsense. Aren't dragons mythological? The great
Time Dragon and all that?"

 "Don't know where the stock came from," said Ansonby, "but let me tell
you: I've seen ‘em with my own eyes. They're about yea big, wingspan the
length of a bedspread. Vicious things, and hard to control. There's a
team been breeding them for a few years now."

 In the course of their military careers, Ansonby and Burny had both
come across Minor Menacier Trism bon Cavalish. They had no opinion one
way or the other, except that he was remote and a bit uppity. Good at
his job, though.

 "Which job is that?"

 Ansonby said, "He's a kind of--what would you call it? An animal
mesmerist, I guess. He's got a silky voice and is real calm. He can woo
an agitated dragon into a sort of trance. Then he takes the dragon's
head in his palms. This is seriously risky, you know. The notched beak
of a dragon can puncture the skin of your forearm, hook your vein, and
unspool it out of your arm with a single jerk. I've seen it happen. No,
I have. Really. Not to bon Cavalish though; he's smooth. When the
dragon's purring, the dragoneer does something suggestible to the beast.
I guess it's about overriding the creature's internal gyroscope, or
navigational mechanism. Or just being persuasive and chummy with an
attack beast. When he's done, the dragon is directable by voice, at
least for a while. Like a falcon with its falconer, a sheepdog with its
shepherd. Go, come, round, back, stay, up, dive, lift, attack."

 "Retreat?"

 "Dunno about retreat. They're attack dragons."

 Liir closed his eyes. "I can't picture a dragon, try as I might, except
for something fanciful in an illustrated magazine, or a stage prop. And
a flying dragon!--sounds effective. Also a little scary."

 Ansonby remarked, "Trism bon Cavalish thinks that someone came up with
the idea after hearing about those flying monkeys organized by old
what's-‘er-face out west. The witchy witch. What was her name anyway?"

 Nobody spoke. The wind soughed and the leaves scratched against one
another. "Come on then, better get on," said Liir nonchalantly. "The
water's heavy, and it'll be a bitch to haul. We're rested enough."

 "Who made you boss?" said the other fellows, without offense. They
dusted themselves off and began to press back to camp.

 

 THERE'D BEEN NO SIGHTof settlement nor even of a solitary hermit for
days. No border marking, either, but they knew they'd reached Quadling
Country by the change in landscape. Little by little the land was
sinking, a series of overgrown meadows stretching for days, every few
miles another half inch lower. The grasses went from emerald to the
yellow of pears, and then to a ghastly sort of white, as if the fields
were being tinged with hoarfrost in the height of summer.

 At night they slung hammocks in stunted sedge trees, and tried to
sleep, though a zillion mosquitoes emerged, and there was little
protection against that. Also a soft, thumpy sort of airborne snail
would constantly blunder into their faces at night, perhaps drawn by the
steamy exhalation of human breath. The camp echoed with a night-long
chorus of stifled girlish screeches or curses as the worm-clods landed
wetly across noses, cheeks, mouths.

 "No wonder this place is uninhabited," said Burny once.

 "It didn't used to be. The Quadlings lived here," Liir pointed out.

 "It's one huge stinkhouse. Any locals still preferring this to the rest
of Oz must be cretinous. Or subhuman. En't our old Wizard done them a
favor to clear them out?"

 

 BUT WORM-CLODS AND MOSQUITOESwere hardly enemy combatants, and the
Seventh Spear knew things could get worse. Ithad to get worse, or why
were they being asked to suffer the indignity of this climate?

 They gained an uncharacteristic hummock of land, a half mile across,
from which the ground water had drained, more or less. Commander
Cherrystone gave them permission to peel off their boots and air their
feet. Eighty men scratched between their toes, where the itch was most
maddening; flakes of wettish skin billowed before being borne away. It
almost looked like snow.

 Commander Cherrystone spoke about their mission.

 "By my reckoning, we aren't far from the outskirts of Qhoyre," he said.
"Common talk in the City treats Qhoyre as a provincial backwater, and
compared to Oz's capital, it is, of course. But it has a distinguished
history of its own, predating annexation by northerners. In the modern
times, there's usually been a Viceroy stationed here to oversee. Not
now. Were things calmer, we would have expected someone dispatched from
Government House to serve as a translator of the native tongue, Qua'ati.
We'll do without, I'm afraid. Unless I have a secret linguist among my
fine young men?"

 No one volunteered.

 "As I thought. It's an ugly tongue but not hard to pick up, I'm told,
if you work at it. I'm sure some of you will find yourselves fluent in a
matter of weeks, and that will come in handy in due course."

 Thematter of weeks stumped them. Also,in due course . Was this some
sort of permanent billeting? To what end?

 Commander Cherrystone explained. It seemed that the Viceroy had been
abducted, and his wife had disappeared, too. No one in Qhoyre admitted
to knowing who was responsible, but the indifference of the natives to
the situation was unsettling to the Scarecrow's cabinet back in the
Emerald City. Quite offensively the Quadlings behaved as if life ought
to go on much as normal, whether with a Viceroy or without one.

 The job of the Seventh Spear was to befriend the locals, keep the
public order, and--best-case scenario--identify and punish the
perpetrators. If the Viceroy and his wife could be found and rescued,
all the better, though he wasn't an indispensable civil servant,
apparently--otherwise he'd not have been saddled with such a hardship
assignment. In any case, the brief of the Seventh Spear didn't extend to
recovery of the Viceroy; showing some muscle, however, was paramount.

 "We'll move into the city, reclaim Government House, and restore
order," he said. "There may be some bloodshed, men."

 They nodded and clutched their weapons.

 "Let us bow our heads and put our holy mission of right governance in
the sight of the Unnamed God."

 This, so far as it could be said for a fact, they did.

 

 DISAPPOINTINGLY, THEIR RECLAIMINGof Government House involved no
bloodshed at all. The toothless old woman who had set up a loom in the
eastern verandah merely handed over a rusty key that had been dangling
on a string around her neck. For one so plump and wrinkled, she took off
at a jaunty trot. Before nightfall a cohort of youngish teenagers,
possibly grandchildren, appeared in the street to haul her loom away.
They left a large tray of aromatic rice, still steaming, and they tossed
red blossoms on the verandah floor that, in the moonlight, looked like
splashed blood.

 Thus a military skirmish fizzled into a social call. The establishment
of dominance proved all the more elusive because the native culture was
one of deference, hospitality, and bonhomie. "This is going to be harder
than I thought," said Commander Cherrystone.

 Being built large enough to be pretentious and commanding, Government
House could just about domicile the entire company of the Seventh Spear.
There was a lot of work to be done in terms of general upkeep, however.
Cracks in the plaster, mildewing whitewash. The garden had run to seed
and was a total embarrassment. How longhad the Viceroy been gone? Or had
he simply been a hapless steward of government property?

 For a good price, the locals supplied acres of mosquito netting, which
the men slung from hooks in the ceilings in the local fashion, cocooning
each small grouping of cots. For extra protection, lengths of netting
were nailed up at the windows, and a webbed arcade was erected from the
kitchen door to the latrines at the back of the garden. In their smalls
the men could walk to relieve themselves at night without fear of being
bitten alive.

 Some of the soldiers picked up Qua'ati, as Commander Cherrystone had
predicted they would.

 

 IT NEVER SNOWEDin Quadling Country. The swamp forests held in the heat.
Time seemed languorous and unchanging. How many years had they been
there? Three? Four? They'd reopened a school and built a kind of surgery
to augment the work of the local doctors. Some of the men had moved out
of Government House, informally, and were consorting with Quadling
women. This was forbidden during a campaign of occupation, but Commander
Cherrystone looked the other way, for he had a common-law wife of his
own by now and he hardly cared to enforce an inconvenient standard.

 Liir worked mornings in Commander Cherrystone's outer office. He copied
documents, he filed, he recommended which of his peers needed punishment
for various minor infractions. As often as not Commander Cherrystone was
absent from the inner office. Liir could go in and smooth down the
crinkled months-old newspapers in which the shipments of Gillikinese
wine came wrapped. He read about the Scarecrow's unfortunate accident
involving that beaker of lighter fluid--what a horrible twist of fate,
that it wasright there !--and the subsequent elevation of the Emperor.
"Would've liked to be invited tothat investiture," said Commander
Cherrystone, coming in on Liir as he jerked upright from his perusings.

 "Old news is better than no news," Cherrystone remarked ruefully, about
once a week. "Still, maybe it's better to be marginalized. You don't get
noticed, and there's a liberty in that, eh, son?"

 "You'll want a bottle of the Highmeadow blanc in the water well, sir,
if you're having guests at table tonight."

 "You remember everything. I'd be lost without you. Can you see to it?"

 "I will." He already had.

 Once a small crate of perguenay cigarettes arrived. "Bless my sweet
bankers, I must've made another killing," said the Commander, reading a
note. "Those Shizian accountants are wizards; they can make money out of
a massacre of mice. Try one, Liir, you won't find better."

 "I've no skill at that, sir."

 "It's not much fun to smoke alone. Put down those charts till later and
join me on the verandah." It sounded like an order, so Liir obeyed,
willingly enough.

 The smoke of dried perguenay was nutty and gamy both, hardly
disagreeable, though taking perfumed heat into his lungs made Liir
cough. "Ain't it grand, the life," said Cherrystone, propping his boots
on the seat of another chair.

 "You could get used to this if you were an ironsmith. Bit roasty for
me, though."

 "You learn to love it. So. Liir. What do you hear from home?"

 Liir was unused to personal conversations with his peers, and this
blunt question from his boss unnerved him. He was glad to have smoke in
his lungs; he held it there while he thought what to answer. "Precious
little."

 "Sometimes the less you hear, the more precious it becomes."

 Sentimental math problems were beyond Liir. "I follow my work day to
day, breakfast to bedtime, sir. That's my life, and it's enough."

 "You're a good lad. You're shaping up. Don't think I don't notice."
Commander Cherrystone closed his eyes. "I would've been happy for a son
like you, but my fond Wendina only gave me girls."

 "You must miss them, sir."

 "They're girls," he said neutrally, and his point was beyond
Liir.They're girls, so why bother? OrThey're girls, so of course I miss
them, don't be daft.

 "Since we're chatting, I wonder if it's bold to ask a question of you,
sir."

 "Ask away."

 "If you had children, how could you stomach storming the castle of
Kiamo Ko and carting off the widow and children of Fiyero?"

 "Oh, back to that! Fair enough; you've earned the right. It was another
time, another country--perhaps another me, Liir. When you're off on a
posting and your family is left behind, they loom in your daily
reflections with a... size, a significance... d the thought of them gives
you courage in times of doubt. I didn't like the maneuvers at Kiamo Ko,
I'll have you know that right now. But I like being a man of my word. I
like doing my duty. As I see you do, too.

 "Besides," he added, "I did my best to delegate."

 "Do you remember seeing Nor? The little girl?"

 "She wasn't a tyke, she was growing up. I saw her. She was brave, if
that's what you're asking. Quite possibly she didn't understand what was
going on."

 "Quite possibly." What a phrase. Of course she didn't understand it:
how could she? She'd been raised on a mountaintop by a widowed mother
and a half dozen spinster aunts. What could she know of military maneuvers?

 "I see it still gives you pause."

 Perhaps less pause than it once had. Waiting for fate to intervene was
hardly taxing, Liir realized. "I think of her from time to time."

 "You probably harbor a youthful resentment against me. It's all very
normal, my lad. You were young at the time, and what could you know of
duty and honor?"

 "I am not sure, even now, I know what honor is."

 The Commander was silent for so long Liir felt perhaps he'd been rude,
or that the Commander thought his remark was rhetorical. But finally he
opened his eyes and said, "How would it seem to you to be promoted to
the rank of a Minor Menacier?"

 Liir felt himself blushing. "I don't deserve it."

 "You deserve it, son. You deserve the honor of it. I'm not a wordsmith,
I can't define the concept of honor. But I know it when I meet it, and I
see by the look on your face you do, too." He grinned almost sheepishly
at Liir. His teeth were yellowing in this climate.

 

 WORD ARRIVED THAT THEnew leadership in the Palace was displeased with
laxness at Government House, and requested the prompt execution of the
Seventh Spear's original mission.

 Commander Cherrystone turned to Liir. Although chilly politeness often
still marked their exchanges, there had come to be some measure of
regard on both sides. Liir was often disdainful of Commander Cherrystone
for his complicated moods--now a front for the Palace, now a critic of
the system--but Liir practiced loyalty and obedience, virtues the Seventh
Spear espoused and he shared. And he was grateful for the promotion, and
the smarter braid on his dress habillard.

 Some of the fellows resented the promotion, but they saw the point.
Liir was unusually circumspect for a young man. Not in any obvious way a
dangerous loner, Liir kept to the margins, befriended other soldiers
only so far as was fitting, and he didn't consort with the Quadlings
beyond what the work required. He was the model of a military man at the
start of his career, so far as anyone could tell. And since he had no
social links with Quadling circles, he was a natural to enjoy what
confidences might arise working in the Commander's office.

 "Sit down and let me rehearse an idea with you," said Cherrystone one
afternoon. Liir remained standing.

 Bengda was a small community twenty minutes southwest of Qhoyre on the
broad flat river known as Waterslip. In the days before the Wizard had
mucked up the water table and wreaked havoc with a centuries-old way of
life, the Bengda district had thrived in one of the few dry areas, humps
of sandy hill on either side of Waterslip. A bridge between the cliffs
had spanned the river. Over the years, with the harvesting of trees, the
soil eroded, though. The hills lost height and subsided into the muck.
Little by little the Bengdani villagers either left or took to the
bridge. Now the hamlet of Bengda supported itself by exacting a toll
from the ferries and commercial fishing vessels that used Waterslip as a
highway between Qhoyre and points south.

 "Entirely improper, of course," said Commander Cherrystone.

 "Surely they'll stop if you threaten them with a fine?" asked Liir.

 "They might and they might not. I hate to give them a chance to knuckle
under, for it's worth more to us if they resist. Can you sniff around
and find out if they would?"

 "I'm not the man for that job," said Liir stiffly. "Begging your
pardon, sir, you have more pull in that department than I do."

 "If I start talking, I'll plant ideas in their heads." The Commander
spoke wearily. "It'll work much better if it happens below ranks. Your
expertise is needed, Liir. Can you put it about among the men that this
information is of interest to me?"

 Liir did, and came back a week later. The residents of Bengda were
stroppy, at least by Quadling standards, but they would probably cave if
presented with an order of prohibition or a bill of tax.

 "That's no good, then." The Commander rubbed his elbows. "What they're
effecting is a kind of extortion of river merchants, really. Perhaps I
could charge them triple all that they've collected since we've been
here. That would beggar them and they'd have to resist. Find out, will you?"

 Liir returned and said that, begging the Commander's pardon, he
couldn't really learn the answer to so specific a question without
tipping the Commander's hand. "Tip, tip, that's the point!" roared the
Commander, so Liir tipped.

 The reply came back that the extended families of the Bengdanis would
manage to come up with the triple penalty and that the bridge dwellers
would stop levying the toll.

 "Damn," said Commander Cherrystone, and he had Liir send out a formal
censure of the Bengda bridge dwellers with a public declamation and a
request for a penalty twice what had already been posted as the triple
penalty.

 Bloody hell no, said the Bengdanis, in Qua'ati, of course. At least not
yet.

 They paid up what they'd collected and made no promise as to when the
exorbitant balance could be expected.

 "That's that, then," said the Commander. "Make sure the whole district
knows about their resistance, Liir. This has to get back to the City or
my reputation is, like everything else in this Quadling quagmire, mud."

 Liir did what he could, talking against the Bengdanis at the mess hall,
the local gin pavilions, in the latrines even. It was uphill work now,
for the Seventh Spear had become lax, and many men tended to think their
Commander was getting high and mighty, not to say unreasonable. "He
could just fork over a third of his own salary to his concubine, and she
could find a way to get it to the Bengdanis," they said. "Why scapegoat
those poor buggers? Why make life so miserable?"

 "It's not ours to make life miserable nor to avoid misery when it's
required of us," said Liir. "Have you whole lot gone to ground here?
That says little about the military discipline we learned."

 "Lighten up," they answered.

 

 COMMANDERCHERRYSTONE TOOKLIIRunder his arm and gave him the assignment
to burn the village right into the river. "Tonight," he said.

 Liir's face was stony. "Sir," he said, "you know as well as I that it's
almost impossible to set anything alight in this climate. The moisture
seeps into everything."

 "I've sent to the Emerald City for provisions to help," said the
Commander. "I've got six buckets of the tar of pulped Gillikinese maya
flower, which would burn in a monsoon. Once night falls, you can paint
the struts and supports of the bridge with it. Begin with the beams
nearest the ends of the bridge, and paint high. Toward the center, paint
low, closer to water level. Light the ends first--simultaneously--to
create walls of fire on each approach, so the Bengdanis can't escape
that way. They'll be crowded toward the center, and there'll be time for
them to consider what to do, to call for help, before the lower-lit
struts burn up enough to imperil them."

 "Who will come to their aid?" said Liir. "They're twenty minutes from
Qhoyre."

 "In twenty minutes someone will hear them and, just as important,
someone will arrive in time to witness their distress. That's the
important bit. I'll see to that if we synchronize our timepieces."

 "Arrive in time to witness? Not to help?"

 "Liir, it's a bridge. They can jump into the water."

 "Commander. Begging your pardon. No one swims in Waterslip at night,
and rarely during the day, either. There are deadly water eels in the
depths, and alligators that feed nocturnally."

 "I didn't settle them there," said the Commander. "Do I detect a note
of insurrection in your voice, soldier?"

 "I don't believe so, sir," said Liir. He was troubled, though, as he
turned away.

 So that there could be no possibility of a warning leaked to the
Bengdanis, the campaign would have to commence at once. Liir conscripted
Ansonby, Burny, and several others. Learning a trick or two from the
high command in the Emerald City, Liir didn't tell them the nature of
their mission. They were to dress in dark clothes and to wear
mosquito-netted caps, to smudge their faces with mud, and to tell no one
what they were doing.

 "It's about the kidnapped Viceroy, I think," Liir invented, when
someone pressed him. "There's been a lead. We're going to smoke out the
kidnappers. But we can't give them a lick of warning or they'll scarper."

 Sunset, with its usual caramel-orangey smear, was quick. The night
creaked in on the wings of countless wakeful insects churring. An
audience of billions.

 

 "DETAILS TO FOLLOW,fellows, but first things first: This is a secret
mission." Liir and his companions huddled by the flatboats he'd
commandeered for the exercise. "You've been chosen because you have
girlfriends here. You'll want to get back to them quickly as possible
and hop into the sack with them. My advice is to try something new
tonight. Make it memorable for you both, so if there's a call for
alibis, you'll be prepared."

 "But fraternizing is frowned up," said Ansonby.

 "I mean if the Quadlings cry for scapegoats, you'll be covered. Anyone
needs advice in the sex department, ask Ansonby. Tell them about
position six, Ansonby." Liir winked. "It's known as Choking the Mermaid
in some quarters."

 He wasn't fooling anyone. Liir was suspected of sexual ignorance, and
he had a reputation for an old-fashioned reticence about such matters.
The fellows looked unhappy.

 "If we're supplied with alibis," said Burny after a while,"what about
the fellows who en't?"

 "Tough luck hits us all," said Liir. "Sooner or later. Maybe they'll
duck it this time. Maybe we will, too. Come on, we're moving out."

 Once it grew dark, the mosquito problem drove most Quadlings into their
stilted huts, though the odd canoe or flatboat sidled along. No one paid
much attention. With the sky moonless at this time of the month--no doubt
the Commander had already figured on this--visibility was reduced, helpfully.

 A half mile north of Bengda, Liir signaled the boats in. He gestured at
the rickety community cantilevered over both edges of the bridge, a hive
of windowed light and the noise of supper and chatter. Then he explained
the mission.

 Burny was the first to speak. "Folks might die," he said.

 "Not sure on that score, but I believe that's taken into account.
Regrettable, but there you are."

 "But women and--and children," said Burny. "I mean, what's children got
to do with tolls or paying taxes, or refusing to pay them? En't they
blameless an‘ all that?"

 "Are children still blameless if they're going to grow up to be the
enemy? I'm not going to discuss this. We're not taking a class in moral
philosophy. We're soldiers and these are our orders. Ansonby, Somes,
Kipper, you do the far end; we rest will start on this side. Here's the
supplies--tar, brushes, a flint when you're ready. Knives."

 "What're the knives for?" asked Burny.

 "Carving your initials in the supports. You moron, what do you think
the knives are for? Use them if you need to. Are we ready?"

 "I can't do this."

 "We'll ask the Unnamed God for the successful completion of our
mission." Four seconds of silence. "Let's go."

 They poled the flatboats forward and then nudged their way among the
villagers' fishing boats, which as usual were tied in a long barricade
beneath the bridge to prevent night traffic from sneaking through
toll-free. The soldiers got a shock when they roused an old Quadling
grandfather from the bottom of his boat, probably avoiding his scold of
a wife. They clapped their hands around his head and bound his mouth
tightly. Then they tied him in a burlap sack and dumped him into Waterslip.

 Commander Cherrystone had chosen the hour perfectly, for the children
of the settlement were fed but not bedded down, and as the soldiers set
to smearing the tar pitch, they could hear the shrill laughter, the
tired crying, the occasional lullaby filtering down through the
rush-matted floors above their heads. The noise made a suitable cover,
were any needed, for the quiet work of arson.

 Their retreat would have to be swift, Liir knew, not only so that they
would go unnoticed by fleeing Bengda villagers, but also so that his men
would be spared the witnessing of what was bound to be ugly. All tyrants
were harsh, but fire was more ungovernable than most.

 He mouthed, "Set. Right. Light." With trembling hands both teams
reached for the oil-soaked rags, which were balled by net wire. The men
impaled the rags on the end of their swords, and struck their
quickflints. The length of the sword allowed each soldier to reach high
enough to light the tar his mate had already smeared into place.

 One team finished faster than the others, since Ansonby in his haste
whipped his sword too swiftly around. Perilously, the clot of burning
rag dislodged early, but Ansonby ducked, and the rag hissed into the river.

 It was neat, a job well done, and both flatboats were eighty feet back
before the timbers truly caught and the night became annealed with the
light of hell. The river reflected the crackling timbers, the shuddering
bridge, which almost at once seemed to be gateposted with pillars of
fire thirty feet tall. Good strong stuff, that maya flower tar! Then the
screams, the dropping timbers, the burning water.

 They were to have been fully away by now, and some other contingent was
to come upon the sight, to report it objectively. But the flatboats got
snared bankside in the knotted roots formed by ancient, shadowy sedge
trees. Besides, the men couldn't stop looking. They could see Bengdanis
running from window to window, house to house, and climbing up the
mildewy thatch of their roofs. Some threw furniture in the water and
tried to leap upon it; a few were successful, though Quadling furniture,
mostly woven rush, was known neither for its strength nor its buoyancy.

 One clump of thatch fell lazily through the blackness, like a falling
star extinguishing itself, or a burning alphabetic vowel swallowed by
watery silence, or a firebird plunging into a suicidal dive in a dark
nameless lake.

 Drunk on metaphor, thought Liir: that means it's time to scamper.
"Guess we better go. We mess up this part of the job, guys, we've messed
up the whole thing."

 "Whatwas the point of this?" asked the one called Kipper.

 "Campaigns are devious; that's why they're called campaigns and not
ballroom dancing lessons," said Liir, but his voice sounded odd. He
leaned his whole weight against the barge pole and began to move out.
"The beds of your lady friends are cold tonight without you, lads, and
if you're not back in time there'll be someone else to take your place
before dawn. You know it better than I. Look sharp--"

 He himself looked sharp, casting an eye around to make sure nothing was
coming upriver from the Bengda bridge. How could it, unless it was a
river monster disturbed by the conflagration and rising in rage? No boat
would ever leave from that bridge again, nor be prevented from passing
under it, either; it was falling, timber by burning timber, and its
population with it, as he watched.

 A man and a woman on the near side, which was collapsing haltingly into
the burning water, had grabbed a child between them. Her clothes were
aflame and the parents or neighbors tore them off. All their mouths were
open, though Liir couldn't distinguish one human scream from all the
others. Then the parents braced themselves as upright as they could
against the sloping structure and began to swing the girl, arms and
legs, to fling her free of the burning.

 Liir was reminded of a game he'd played when he was what, seven,
eight?--when Irji and Manek had swung little Nor like that, and then
swung him, too. But it was into a bank of snow in the wintery heights of
the Great Kells, at Kiamo Ko; it wasn't to save his life, or hers. It
was for fun.

 The girl twisted as they let go, and her arms reached back, as if she
could will herself to swim through the night air and return to the arms
of her parents. The fire behind them caught up with their legs and ran
up their backs as she hovered like a naked girl bird, gilded red-bronze
in the light. Then she crashed into the water. The efforts of her
parents had worked this much: she landed beyond the pools of burning oil
in which everyone else had fallen.

 Liir leaped from the boat, hissing over his shoulder "Back to base!
That's an order!" He didn't turn to see if he was obeyed. In vain he
looked for the girl. He didn't see her. He didn't see if she had swum
ashore, or if she had sunk, or if she had swum back into the fiery
liquid to join her parents in their immolation.

 

 GOVERNMENTHOUSE WAS LOCKEDdown with tighter security than he'd ever
seen it, but Liir had no trouble signaling to the night watch and
getting in. Despite instructions to the contrary, Ansonby and Burny and
the others weren't out canoodling with their local girls; they'd taken
refuge in the barracks. The company of their mates must seem more
consoling. And Liir observed thatno one was off the premises that night.
The other soldiers must have been alerted not to stray. For defense of
the post? For their own safety? That meant the guys assigned to the
mission would have been the only ones outside of military protection.
Liir saw it now. They'd have been sitting ducks, isolated from each
other, naked in bed with native women when and if the news spread and a
retaliation was launched.

 "The hero of the hour! Where've you been?" asked Somes.

 Liir started to say something about the girl. He hadn't been able to
find her, partly because it had been hard to train his eyes on the
scene. It seared too brightly to be able to read.

 "We've been fortifying ourselves with whiskey and patting ourselves on
the back. The bridge is history! Come in for a rousing welcome."

 "History. History. In a flash," said Liir. "Need to get something first."

 He ducked along the upper verandah that looked onto the central
courtyard, keeping back in the shadows and out of sight of men lounging
by the fountain below. It only took him a moment to grab his satchel,
the few things he'd stored in his trunk at the foot of his bed. He put
his dress boots on the windowsill: a kind of symbol, he supposed, that
he'd jumped. Everyday boots would serve well enough. Then, the old,
mildewing cape and the broom on his back, a corked flagon of fresh water
slung over his shoulder, he made his way lightly down a back staircase
and through the dry goods pantry. Then over the wall, literally and
figuratively.

 

 WITH THEWITCH'S BROOM,he had the means to travel swiftly, but his heart
was so heavy that he couldn't imagine lifting off the ground--or if he
did, only to reach a height suitable for throwing himself from his perch.

 He walked, and took no pains to conceal his tracks or silence his
footfall. North, as far as he could tell. He corrected his trajectory by
checking it against the movement of the sun, and if one day he wobbled
too much to the west, the next he would likely wobble easterly.

 It was early spring when he left Qhoyre--spring by the calendar, not by
the growing season, for in the marshlands, rot and flower and fruit and
seed and rot happened simultaneously all year. Long ago the climate had
become a second skin from which he couldn't extract himself until, weeks
on, his path began to climb, and now and then his foot landed on a
hillock of dry grass.

 He'd expected some crocodile to snap off a limb while he slept, a marsh
cat to take a swipe at him, but the only creatures that seemed aware of
his presence were the mosquitoes, and he yielded himself to them without
complaint. He imagined them bleeding him dead, a thousand bites a day
for a thousand days, until from the inside out he would have dried up
entirely. Then--another way of flying!--a strong gust might come along and
begin to worry a fleck of skin, and his whole being might toss itself
like a scatter of midges in the air and disappear.

 Weeks of walking, resting, walking. He didn't look for food, but the
amoral landscape threw succor in his path. Thrashes of greenberry bush,
ground nuts, the occasional swamp apple, porcupine root. He grew leaner
than ever, though his diet seemed sufficient, for he suffered neither
from dreams nor dysentery.

 His sense of the geography of Oz was limited, but its most salient
feature was the scimitar-shaped spine of high mountains that curved up
from south central Oz to the northwest. He needed to get through the
Quadling Kells--either by the Yellow Brick Road or not. Once he was
northside of the mountains, he'd turn west and keep them on his left.
Sooner or later he'd come to the gorge known as Kumbricia's Pass, the
best route to the vast grasslands of the Vinkus. But he'd move on, until
the Great Kells raised their ice-sheathed peaks on the west. He'd have
to hit the Vinkus River, and he'd follow it north to where it emerged in
a dazzling waterfall from a hung valley in the central Kells. Up the
side of that waterfall, tracing the banks of the rightmost branch of the
higher Vinkus, and still higher up the middle ridge of Knobblehead Pike,
and he'd be back.

 Not home. There was no place like home. Just back. Back at Kiamo Ko.

 As he walked, he thought of nothing, when he could manage that. The
world in its variety had no appeal, and seemed mocking and vain.
Clearing the Quadling Kells with relative ease, he'd come out into an
easy summer on the northern slopes, wherein fruit trees sported flocked
yardage of blossom, and bees sawed the sunny afternoon with their
industry. It was not music, but noise. He stole some maple sap from a
hermit's storehouse in the woods, not to savor, just to feed the gut.

 In time there was evidence of human habitation again--a homestead here
or there, a shrine on the road--to Lurline or to the Unnamed God, he
couldn't tell and didn't care, and didn't stop to pay homage. He avoided
people when he could, and when he could not, he was stone-tongued enough
to be alarming. The kinder of the farm folk might offer a scupper of
milk or a blanket in the hay loft, but they wouldn't welcome him in to
their table. Nor would he have accepted.

 Once he came upon an old woman driving a four-horned cow before her
with a switch. She was accompanied by a kid, a boy by the looks of it,
who seemed frightened of his granny, and shot Liir a desperate, pleading
look. The woman turned her switch on the child and hissed, "There's
nothing to look at in him, Tip, so mind your eyes or the road'll trip
you up, and you're not riding the cow so stop thinking about it. We
didn't come all this way for a prize specimen so you could mope and roll
your eyes."

 "How far is all this way?" asked Liir--not that he cared, but he thought
if the woman would talk to him, she'd have less breath for smacking the boy.

 "Gillikin, and we aim to get there before the snow flies, but I have my
doubts," snapped the woman. "As if it's any of your concern."

 "That's a long way to come for a cow," said Liir.

 "A four-horned cow gives quality milk, useful for certain recipes,"
said the woman.

 The boy said, "You could sell me to this soldier, and then you could
ride the cow home yourself."

 "I wouldn't dream of selling a boy as useless as you," she answered,
"the good burghers of Gillikin would have my license for passing on
damaged goods. Keep your mouth shut, Tip, or you'll regret it."

 "I don't buy children," said Liir. He looked the boy in the eye. "I
can't save anyone. You have to save yourself."

 Tip bit his lower lip, keeping his mouth shut, but his eyes stayed
trained on Liir's. The rebuke seemed to Liir to say:You have to save
yourself? And what proof of that are you, soldier?

 "Although if you were to offer that besom of yours," said the woman, "I
suppose I might risk my professional reputation. It's a handsome item."

 Liir passed on without replying. A mile or two later, he stopped to
tighten his bootlace, and in looking back he saw that the woman, the
cow, and the child had veered a bit northward across some meadows. The
best route to the Emerald City, and Gillikin beyond, led between
Kellswater and Restwater, through the oakhair forest, so now he could
guess he wasn't far from Kumbricia's Pass. This proved to be true.

 High summer, then, on the banks of the Vinkus River. He bathed in it.
The mosquito plague was behind him now, kept away by a steady breeze
sweeping down off the flanks of the Great Kells, which like transparent
slices of melon were beginning to hover insubstantially to his left. The
Vinkus River ran broad and shallow here, and icy cold even in the
hottest sun, for it was fed by a thousand rills cascading down the piney
slopes of the mountains.

 Still, no animals. No herds of dancing mountain ponies, no turtles
spending a decade or two in the middle of the path, very few birds even,
and those too far away to identify. It was as if he gave off such a
stink that the animal world was retracting from him as he moved north
and west.

 One evening he tried to cut his own hair, for it was falling in his
eyes. His army-issue knife had become blunt from peeling porcupine root,
and his efforts to sharpen it on a stone had come to nothing. He made a
pig's breakfast of the haircut, finally dropping the knife and pulling
at his hair, yanking it out by the roots till his scalp bled into his
eyes. He thought the blood might refresh his broken tear ducts, and for
an instant he imagined something like relief--relief--but it did not come.
He dried his face and tied his hair back, and endured the sweat and damp
of a heavy burden of hair.

 The mountains, nearer now, loomed as a kind of oppressive company,
their aroma of granite and balsam unmistakable, unlike anything else,
and as unconsoling as anything else. Their million years of lifting
their own heads was just a million years, nothing more than that. The
summer was going, the sun was sinking earlier, he caught the tang of a
fox one day on the wind, and felt the bite of an appetite--to see a fox.
A simple fox darting past, out on its own business. He saw no fox.

 The world seemed punitive in its beauty and reserve. Sometimes, thought
Liir--his first thought in weeks and weeks--sometimes I hate this
marvelous land of ours. It's so much like home, and then it holds out on
you.

 

 THEN HE CAMEto a place where the Vinkus ran by a series of small
lakes--none more than a mile or two long, and all of them narrow. Clearly
they'd been formed by the same compulsion of landscape, for there was a
family feel to them. The water was fresh and moving, and though he could
see no fish, Liir imagined there were schools out of sight. Larches and
birches and the thin growth known as pillwood made a pinkish fringe on
the far shores. For the first time since leaving Qhoyre, Liir aborted
his slow tromp north. He took a day to look around, for the landscape
seemed obscurely pleasing, and he wasn't used to being pleased anymore.

 The middle of five lakes was more fan-shaped than the others, and from
the pinched point to the south it opened up to a wide vista of low
hills--basket-of-eggs country--that caught the light and made patterns of
shadow, one hill to the next. He explored the lake's southern shore and
found there a smoothly rounded hill not much larger than a pasture or
two, overgrown with pillwood trees, and slashed through with horizontal
outcroppings of granite or trusset, he couldn't tell which.

 The grass beneath the trees was evenly cropped, and pelleted with
droppings, so some ruminant herd loitered nearby, keeping the sward
neat. This gave the place a domestic look.

 Liir sat down with his back to a tree and looked out over the water,
which was lipped by the wind coming south, and striped with light
catching on the wave tips.

 It could make a home, he thought; pretty enough to tolerate, and no one
around. The beyond of beyond. Nether How, he named it,how being a useful
old word for hill. And how pompous that is, to name a place just because
you rested your ownnether how there for a while!

 But he closed his eyes and drifted into a sort of waking dream, as he'd
done once or twice before. He saw himself sitting there, almost nodding
off, more of a man than when he had started out, but still lost, like
most young men, andmore lost than most. With no sense of a trade, no
native skill except to make mistakes, no one to learn from, no one to
trust, and no innate virtue upon which to rely... d no way to see the future.

 He rose to the height of the leaves of the pillwood trees, which were
beginning to turn amber, a first hint of autumn. He saw himself below,
the ill-cut hair--what a botched job!--and the knees, and the feet turned
out as if planted there. If he could just stop breathing, he'd become
part of Nether How; sink capably into the grass. When his offensive
spirit had left his body, the mountain sheep or the lakeland skark or
whatever animal fed here would eventually overcome its fear, and nibble
the grass right up to his limbs, keeping it shorn around him.

 Then his attention turned to another figure, distantly apprehended
though near enough. It was a man in a cloak of purple-rose velveteen,
holding a staff and a book of some sort. He was emerging in the air as
one seen coming through a fog. He seemed to be off balance at first, and
tested the ground with his staff until he found his feet. Setting his
funny hat straight on his brow, he pulled at his eyebrows as if they
bothered him, and he began to look around himself. Liir imagined he was
speaking, but there was no sound, just the apparition of a funny old
man, sober and crazed at once, making his way along the brow of Nether How.

 The old man passed close by the body of dozing Liir, down below--the
Liir-shade in the tree branches saw it. The old man, maybe a scholar of
some sort, paused as if curious, and looked at the tree against which
Liir was leaning. Then he looked up into its branches. But his eyes
could not focus on Liir at rest, nor Liir aloft, and he shrugged and
began to make his way down the hill.

 A good way to avoid company, if I want to avoid it, thought Liir, as
his spirit began once again to settle down into his body, or--put another
way--as his little dreamlet ended and the sorrier sense of the world,
even this pretty corner of it, flooded back in.

 He had left Nether How and was well along the lake's rightmost flank,
continuing north, when he remembered the revery and saw something in it
he hadn't noticed at the time. He had recognized the book that the old
fellow was hauling about with him. It was the Grimmerie, the book that
the Witch--that Elphaba--had used as her book of spells.

 

 HE HAD LOOKEDfor the Grimmerie once, hadn't he? But that was before
he'd set out from Kiamo Ko with Dorothy. And met up with that old
she-Elephant, Princess Noserag or something. Who had promised to try to
help find Nor, or to share what she could learn.

 Proud and confident as only the truly stupid can be, he'd set out to
find Nor on his own. Smart move, Liir, he said to himself. Good one,
that. Just look at where you got to by keeping your own counsel.

 Well, that was something, though. At least he was talking to
himself--instead of giving himself the cold shoulder.

 

 IT TOOK TWO MOREmonths to finish the journey. He was in no hurry.

 Once, as he rejoined the Vinkus River, he spotted a single stag. It
stood alert in the middle of a long line of mature beech trees that ran
the crest of a ridge, half-lit by an effect of late afternoon sun and
cloud. Knee-deep in dried grass, the stag watched him as he passed. It
did not flinch or flee. Nor did it attack him.

 

 AT LAST,something familiar: the small settlements that clung to the
slopes of the Kells. Arjiki villages, some with names, some not.
Fanarra, and Upper Fanarra, and Pumpernickel Rock, and Red Windmill. It
was late fall, early winter; the flocks were down from the heights,
noisy in their fold; the summer cording was done, and skeins of dyed
skark yarn were knotted and hung out to dry on pegs. The smell of
vinegar used to set the dye tightened the skin in his nostrils.

 The Arjikis regarded his progress along Knobblehead Pike without
comment. If some of them recognized him, they didn't let on. It had been
almost a decade since he'd left with Dorothy. Everything had changed
within him--he'd broken out of his shell to find himself wanting--but the
Arjikis looked stolid and eternal.

 He recognized none of them, either.

 As he walked the last mile, looking up, the old waterworks towered high
from the strong thighs of the mountain. It loomed overhead with
impossible perspective, and the clouds above it whipped by so quickly
that, as he stood with his head thrown back, he became dizzy. To see it
again!--the old pile, once the family home of the prince of the Arjikis,
then the castle refuge of the Wicked Witch of the West. Kiamo Ko.

 Its stones were streaked with the water from snow melting off the
battlements. (Harsh weather sometimes hit the higher mountains as early
as Summersend.) Its roofs looked to be in a serious state of disrepair.
Crows shot from the eaves, and an oriel window seemed to have collapsed,
leaving a gaping maw, but smoke was issuing from a chimney, so someone
was in residence.

 He hadn't spoken a word since meeting the woman on the road, the crone
with the four-horned cow and the child. He wasn't sure he could still talk.

 The bartizans were deserted, the ceremonial drawbridge of the central
gate was up, but the gatehouse door was wide open, and snow drifted
within. Security wasn't the top concern of whoever lived here now.

 He gripped the broom in his hand, and tightened the Witch's cape around
him--he'd worn it several weeks now, glad to have carted it all these
seasons, as it was helpful against the chill. Mercy, mercy, he thought,
I'm home from the wars, whatever that means. He climbed the steep steps
to the gatehouse and went in to the primary courtyard.

 At first he saw no change at all; but he was looking through the eyes
of memory, and those eyes were blurred with tears. She might have come
back here, he thought at last. Have I been hoping this all along, step
by step--is this hope what has kept me from dying? If Nor really had
survived her abduction, she might have made her way back here as I have.
She might even now be slapping a meat pasty into a hot oven and turning
at the sound of my foot on the cobbles.

 Then he wiped his eyes with the heels of his hands. The place had gone
from rack to ruin, and some of the hard edges of its utilitarian design
had become softened by neglect. The cobbles were covered in dried
leaves, and a dozen or more saplings like party guests stood here and
there, human size or even a little taller, twitching their thin limbs in
excitement at a new arrival. A shutter banged overhead. Ivy clawed up
the side of the chapel. Several windows were broken and more young trees
leaned out.

 It was silent but not still; everything rustled almost without sound.
He could have heard a baby cry in its sleep down in a cradle in Red
Windmill, had some baby needed to cry just then.

 He turned about slowly, his arms open, pivoting on one heel. Allowed a
torrent of emotion to batter him from within.

 When he finished his revolution, the monkeys were there under the
trees, on the outside steps, peering out through the yellowing foliage
in the windows. They had come from nowhere while his eyes were misted.
Some of them trembled and held their wingtips; a couple shat themselves.
This breed had never taken to personal hygiene with any conviction.

 "Liir?" said the nearest one. He had to walk with his knuckles on the
ground; had the years of living with heavy wings curved his spine? Or
was it merely age?

 "Chistery," said Liir, cautiously; he wasn't sure. But Chistery's face
had broken into a grin at being recognized.

 He came up and took Liir's hand and kissed it with gummy affection.

 "Don't do that, don't," said Liir. He and Chistery then walked hand in
hand through the warped door into the ominous, plain, high-ceilinged
staircase hall, just as they had done fifteen, eighteen years ago, when
for the first time they'd arrived together at the castle with Elphaba
Thropp.

 

 IT DIDN'T TAKE HIM LONGto figure out that Nor wasn't there. The sudden
lurch of thought about her, though, crackled almost aurally through his
apprehensions of Kiamo Ko. It was as if he could just about hear her
childish squeals and pattering feet.

 Still, he couldn't indulge in moodiness even if he wanted. For one
thing, the skanky stench of monkey ordure cut through the complicated
memories of childhood. He had to watch where he stepped. Public health
hazard.

 He was hardly surprised to find Nanny still alive. She'd be in her
ninetieth year now, or more? Surely. Her olfactory senses had long fled
her, so she seemed unbothered by the fumes, and her own bedding and day
gown were in a less-than-pristine condition. Sitting bolt upright in bed
with a bonnet on her head and a beaded purse clutched between her hands,
she greeted him without much surprise, as if he'd only been down in the
kitchen this past decade, getting himself a cup of milk.

 "It's hizzie, it's whosie, yourself in all your glory, if you can call
it that," she said, and offered her cheek, which had sunk dramatically
into a hollow of greying crinkles.

 "Hello, Nanny. I've come to visit you," said Liir.

 "Some does and some doesn't."

 "It's Liir."

 "Of course it is, dear. Of course." She sat up a little straighter and
looked at him. Then she picked up an ear trumpet from her bedside table
and shook it. A ham sandwich fell out, the worse for wear. She regarded
it with disapproval and took a healthy bite. She put the trumpet back
against her head. "Who is the whosie?"

 "Liir," he said, "do you remember? The boy with Elphaba?"

 "Now that's one as never visits. Up in her tower. Too much studying and
you'll chase the boys away, I always said. But she had a mind of her
own. Are you going up there? Tell her to show some respect to her elders
and bitters."

 "Do you remember me?"

 "I thought you might be Grim Death, but it's only the haircut."

 "Liir, it is. Liir."

 "Yes, and whatever happened to the boy? He was a funny noodley one. It
took him forever to get trained, as I recall. Still, he'd fit right in
now." She rolled her eyes at Chistery, who stood fondly by with his
hands folded. "He never writes, you know. That's all right, though, as I
can't read anymore."

 Liir sat down on a stool and held Nanny's hand for a while. "Chistery,
is there anything like sherry around?" he asked suddenly.

 "Whatever hasn't evaporated in its bottles. We don't touch the fumey
stuff," said Chistery. That's a bit righteous, thought Liir, and
realized, too, that Chistery's language had improved hugely. Now that
everyone had stopped trying to teach him.

 Chistery returned in time with a dusty bottle. It was ancient cooking
brandy, and a B grade at that, but Nanny's palate had clearly
deteriorated like some of her other talents, and she sipped it happily,
goofily.

 After a nap that lasted only a few moments, she was awake, and more
alert. Her eyes looked as they once had: less swift to track, perhaps,
but no less canny.

 "You're the boy, grown up some," she said. "Not enough, I see, but
there's time."

 "Liir," he reminded her. He wanted to work fast while she was
attending. "Nanny. Do you remember when we came here? Elphaba and I?"

 She screwed up her face and settled on an answer almost at once. "I do
not, Liir. Because I came later. You were already here when I got here."

 Of course.He had forgotten this. "Elphaba was your charge, wasn't she?
You were her nanny. She told you everything."

 "She hadn't much to tell," said Nanny. "For an interesting life, you
wanted to listen to her mother. Melena. Saucy little thing, got around
the parish, if you know what I mean. A trial to her husband, Frex. Nowhe
was a good man, and like most good men, a crashing bore about it. The
hours he spent trying to convert me to unionism! As if the Unnamed God
wanted to take an interest in Nanny! Preposterous."

 He didn't want to talk about religion. "I want to ask you something
directly. If you know the answer, you can tell me. I'm grown up now. Was
Elphaba my mother?"

 "She didn't know," said Nanny. Her mouth took the shape of an O--O!--as
if startled all over again by the ridiculous conceit. "She suffered some
terrible blow, and lapsed into a dreamless sleep for months on end. Or
so she said. When she came to, and was suitably convalesced, she stayed
on to work for some maunts. Then she left them to come here, and they
gave her you to take along. That's all she ever knew. She supposed
shecould have given birth to you in a coma. It is possible. These things
do happen." She rolled her eyes.

 "Why didn't she ask about me--and her?"

 "I suppose she thought the answer didn't matter. There you were, one
way or the other. It hardly signified."

 "It matters to me."

 "She was a good woman, our Elphie, but she wasn't a saint," said Nanny,
both tartly and protectively. "Leave her her failings. Not everyone is
cut out to be a warm motherly type."

 "If she thought Imight be her child, wouldn't she have mentioned the
possible father?"

 "She never did what another person might. You remember that. Now, Idid
know that fellow named Fiyero, once upon a time, and you don't look much
like him, if that's your game. Frankly, you could more easily pass for a
child of Nessarose. Elphaba's sister, the Wicked Witch of the East as
they called her behind her back. If youwere Elphie's there'd be the
green skin, wouldn't there? It's a puzzle. Is there any more of that juice?"

 He poured a small sip more. "Did you raise Nessarose, too? And their
baby brother? Shell?"

 "Their father, Frex, thought I was too pagan to be over involved
withNessarose . Me with my devotions to dear Lurline, our fairy mother.
Frex wanted a godly child, and it was clear, with her alarming hue, that
Elphaba wasn't it. Nessarose was born a martyr--that unfortunate
disability! Revolting, really--and she lived and died as a martyr. If she
had even a second or two to understand that a house was about to come
and sit on her head, I'm sure she died happy."

 "I never met her."

 "In the Afterlife, my boy, count on it. She'll be waiting there to
improve you some more."

 "And Shell? I've met Shell once or twice."

 "Oh,that lad! The high jinks of that one! He was in and out of trouble
like tomorrow's stitches in yesterday's britches. He led poor Frex a
merry chase! Shell was hopeless at school, a good-joke johnnycake, in
trouble with the masters and in the skirts of the misses. And he grew to
have a smart mouth for wine, they say. He used to lie to his father so
well that you'd‘ve sworn he was born for the stage. Of course in his
line of work, later on, all that came very much in handy."

 "What work was that? Medicine?"

 "Never heard it called that. I think the term is espionage. Snooping,
settling scores out of the public eye, selling information, and if the
tales have any truth to them, sexing up the ladies from Illswater to Ugabu."

 That made some sense, then, of Shell's activities in Southstairs. He
was ferreting out information from political prisoners and getting laid
in the bargain.

 "I know she's dead," said Nanny flatly, looking out the window. "Dead
and gone. At least once a day I remember that much. You could be her
son. Why don't you just decide you are?"

 "I had nothing from Elphaba but misery," he replied. "It was a happy
sort of misery, since children know no better. But she left me
nothing--nothing but a broom and a cape. She left me no clues. I have no
talents. I haven't her capacity for outrage. I haven't her capacity for
magic. I haven't her concentration."

 "You're young yet, these things take time. I myself couldn't cast off
until I was well into my sixties, but then I could do it so
enthusiastically I once fell right out of my chair."

 "I think you know if you're different," he ventured. "I think you know
if you're gifted. How could you not?"

 "You know if you feel set apart," said Nanny, "but who doesn't feel
that? Maybe we're all gifted. We just don't know it."

 "Does no good to have a useless gift."

 "Have you tried? Have you even tried to read from her book of spells?
From what I remember, Elphaba had to learn. She did go to school, you
know. She was a scholarship girl at Shiz."

 "Chistery's learned to talk well," he said, after a while.

 "My point exactly," she said, draining her glass. "He had to try for
years, and it suddenly clicked."

 He walked around the room. The windows were shuttered against the early
autumn gale--how well he remembered the way it blew up the valleys,
sometimes forcing the snow back up into the clouds that had dropped it.
"You have a good life?"

 "I havehad a good life," she corrected him. "Chistery comes from time
to time, and the filthy peasants bring their filthy food, which I'm
expected to eat as my part in community relations. I do as I'm bade."

 "Anyone else?"

 "Not in a dog's age. Not since that Dorothy. And you and the others.
Did Dorothy ever stop whimpering so? She'll grow up to require the
convent, mark my words. Or a husband with a good strong backhand. Her
fanny wants spanking badly."

 "Dorothy came back?"

 "She did?" Nanny's clarity was ebbing.

 "If I go up to Elphaba's room," said Liir carefully, "and if I find
something of hers, may I take it?"

 "What, you're looking for precisely what?"

 "A book, maybe."

 "Not that big thick thing she was always poring through?"

 "Yes."

 "Much good it would do you even if she would let it out of her sight.
She could hardly ever get those recipes to work. I remember once she was
trying to work a spell on a pigeon she'd caught. She was trying to teach
it to be a homing pigeon. She let it loose from her window. It zipped
away from her as fast as it could, but when she called ‘Come back now,'
the thing turned and dived like a suicidal lover, and impaled itself on
the weather vane." The old woman sighed. "Actually it was kind of funny."

 "I'll leave you for a while, Nanny, and I'll come back. I promise."

 "I never cared for pigeons except in pies. Poor little Nor, though, was
heartbroken."

 "Nor," said Liir cautiously.

 "The little girl who used to live here. You remember. With the others."
But Nanny grew vague now and she could be made to say no more about
Fiyero's three children.

 "What if I find that book?" asked Liir. "If no one has taken it away,
may I have it?"

 "You'll have to ask Elphaba."

 "If she's not there to ask?"

 "Where would she be?" said Nanny. "Where would she be? Where is she?
Elphie!" she suddenly bellowed. "Why don't you come when I call you?
After all I did for you all my life, and your slut of a mother before
you!Elphie! "

 Chistery came flying from the corner of the room where he had been
folding a basket of laundry. He made shooing hands to Liir, who backed
out of the room, shaken.

 

 LIIR SPENT THE FIRSTfew weeks helping put Kiamo Ko to rights. He
reminded the monkeys about sanitation, first and foremost. Under his
help, the monkeys set to work closing up windows that had blown open,
and repairing the roof when the wind didn't imperil them. Liir began to
weed the forecourt of its convocation of trees, sad as he did so, for
even in their autumnal twiggery they provided some semblance of company.
But then he decided to prune and thin rather than remove the trees
entirely. Under its ivy and moss and tiny domesticated forest, the place
might as well succumb to green. It seemed a suitable memorial for
Elphaba Thropp.

 He couldn't bring himself to go up to her tower rooms, though. He was
afraid he might throw himself from the highest window if the grief took
him unawares, like a demon lover.

 He visited Nanny and made her conditions comfortable and more sanitary.
In a sideboard in the dining room he found a magnifying glass and some
dusty old novels written decades ago.The Curse of the Admirable Frock
was one;A Lady among Heathen, another. "Trash," decided Nanny at once
and set to reading them with gusto. It turned out she had not forgotten
the skill; it was merely her eyes giving her trouble, and the lens helped.

 He watched the autumn go golden, then spare. He took care not to get
too friendly with Chistery and the others. Isolation was one thing, but
forming an unseemly attachment to a Flying Monkey might be quite
another. The monkeys kept to their quarters--the old stables, the hayloft
and granary--and he slept in the room that Nor had used as a little girl.
The days darkened earlier, and when he went to bed in the gloom, he
hardly knew if he was twelve or twenty-ish.

 A few days after the autumn rains began, a Swan was driven into the
forecourt, and huddled for four days under a set of steps. He brought
her milk and meal, and helped her wash her bloody breast, for she'd been
attacked. She couldn't give a name to the predator; she didn't know what
it might be called. She lived long enough to say that she had summoned a
Conference of Birds to convene in Kumbricia's Pass, but she'd gotten
blown off course in some nasty weather.

 "What's the Conference about?" asked Liir.

 She wasn't accustomed to talking to a human, and resisted saying more.
As her death drew nearer, though, she relented. "The rising threat.
Can't you see it? Being creatures of the wing, we have largely escaped
the harshness that has befallen the creatures of the soil, but now we
are paying for our isolation and pride."

 Before she died she said more to Chistery, perhaps feeling that as a
winged creature he was more deserving of her confidences. Despite a
blinding rain, they buried her beautiful downy carcass deep in the
orchard. Out of respect Chistery and Liir didn't rake her plumage for
feathers to improve the household bedding, though Liir guessed that they
both considered it.

 

 SHE HAD BEEN APRINCESSamong the Swans, said Chistery. Her last wish was
that, as a Flying Monkey, he should take her place at the Conference and
deliver her opening remarks to those assembled.

 Chistery said them carefully, trying to remember.

 "She said that the danger imperiling members of the Yunamata and the
Arjiki clans, the Scrow and Ugabusezi, and the other tribes of the
Vinkus, is related to what threatens Munchkinlanders in their fields and
Scalp dwellers in their caves--it is a related sorrow, or the same
trouble under different names. Trouble, sorrow, danger, peril: the
Animals suffer no less than the Quadlings; the Birds are merely the
latest, and neither the least nor the last--but only the Birds see
everything, and they are coming together to share their information, to
tell what they see, and to sound an alarm."

 "I can't make out what you mean, Chistery."

 He moaned. "I'm trying to say what that Swan Princess said. Don't ask
me what it means! My head! She said, ‘It isn't a matter of each
generation taking care of its own, each species protecting its own
young, each tribe its own kind. It is not a matter of that.'" Chistery's
head looked as if it were going to explode. These were not matters he
was used to discussing. "The parvenu Emperor is the First Spear of
God--that's what he calls himself. He aims it against the whole world; no
discrimination left. We have no choice but to resist.‘"

 "Are you going to go to the Conference? Where is it?"

 "The eastern mouth of Kumbricia's Pass. No, I'm not going." Chistery
spat. "I'm not a Bird, and I'm hardly a Monkey--more a monkey, really.
Besides, my wings wouldn't manage that distance anymore. I need a nice
perch and a hot cup of cocoa before sleep, and a good private scratch in
the morning, or I can't answer for myself. It isn't pretty."

 Liir couldn't force Chistery to put himself in danger. He was the chief
of his tribe, after all; the others had never advanced in language or
understanding quite as he had. Well, he'd had Elphaba's tutelage.

 What would the Witch have done? Liir didn't know. He pestered Chistery
until the Monkey cried, "Leave me be! How would I know what she'd do?"

 "She always liked you better than me," Liir snapped at him.

 "Frankly, Liir, I'd rather be cleaning the chamber pots than having
this chat." Chistery left. Liir noticed he hadn't contradicted the
assertion about the Witch's affections. Weasely beast.

 Liir started up the stairs to see if Nanny was in one of her sharper
moments. But she was asleep with the port bottle nestled between her
fingers, so he kept going, up and up, at last, to the rooms in the
southeast tower, the suite that had been the Witch's study, her home and
her hermitage.

 The place was much as he had left it a decade earlier, though furred
with a cold and clammy sort of dust. The one broad bank of windows
looking east was shuttered, enshrouding the chamber with shadows. Mouse
droppings littered everything, but that was expected in a castle without
a cat.

 He had to put his weight against the bar that kept the shutters closed,
but at length the thing trembled and gave way. He only opened a segment
of the window, so that enough light could come in and save him from
barking his shins. As it was, he stumbled over a low chest of drawers,
shattering a range of baby roc wing bones that the Witch had been
drawing shortly before the end.

 The room was a wheel, and he imagined it spun around him, but then that
was him turning, wasn't it, turning so his eye could fall on everything
at once. He had looked unsuccessfully for the Grimmerie once before. Now
he was taller, and his eye better trained: perhaps he would make it out
lying slumped on some shelf, or stashed on top of a cupboard.

 He didn't see it. Maybe he just didn't want to see it, for it would
only reinforce the murkiness of his origins. Elphaba had been able to
read that book, to decipher its skittering language somehow, but few
else had--maybe no one else. He didn't know. He had been good at Qua'ati,
but to master a foreign language of magic was another business entirely.
Hell, he hadn't even been able to tie his own shoes until he was ten.

 Expecting little, he pushed aside furniture, looked under the mildewed
cushions of the window seat. The wardrobe was locked, but he found a
skeleton key in a chipped teacup and worried the latch open.

 Inside hung a few dresses, mostly in the black that the Witch favored.
There were no shelves, and no Grimmerie hidden beneath a secret floor.
Just a pair of boots. He pulled them out and looked at them.

 They were expensively cut and pieced, made of some supple leather that
had been well treated. Where the boots had folded a bit, there were only
eyelash cracks. A gentleman's boots, Liir realized. Elphaba kept a pair
of men's boots under lock and key?

 He felt inside them. One was empty. The other yielded a piece of
curling paper about eight inches square. He took it to the window and
flattened it on his knee so he could make it out.

 A sketch of Nor. No mistake about it. The chin was all wrong, and the
eyes too close together, but the joyful tilt of the head, the way the
hair whipped off the brow--it could be no other. Liir could see the
artist's tentative first lines corrected by definitive cross-hatching in
a kind of drypoint, with highlights of coffee-colored wash. Maybe the
artist had spilled some coffee on purpose and rubbed definitions in with
a finger. Elphaba?

 He turned the paper over. On the back, in a crude, distinctive hand,
was scrawled

 Nor by Fiyero.

 This is me Nor

 by my father F

     before he left

 So Elphaba had kept it--as another token of Fiyero, maybe, something
from his hand. And perhaps also because she had admired Nor a little, in
her own way--to the extent Elphaba could admire any child. Nor had had spunk.

 He turned his head to avoid any more of that kind of thinking. The
light from the window worked a glint upon a kind of bowl of glass. A
ball, really. He rubbed the dust from it; it played like a bright
spatter of sunlit rain as he cleaned it.

 He found a low stool with five legs, each carved with its own
representative foot: a dwarf, an elf, a human, a bird, and an elephant.
He drew the stool close and sat down with his chin in his hands.

 Lifting his chin this way and that, looking at himself slantwise. Did
his chin have a sharp line to it, was his nose sloping and stabbing as
Elphaba's had been? Was his skin the color of her brother Shell's?
Whatever efforts or accidents had brought him into the world--was he
worth it? And if so--worth it to whom? He was poised as a girl preparing
for her first party, trying to see her own loveliness. He didn't care
for loveliness, one way or the other: but he looked for something that
might stand in its stead. Something like merit. Capability.

 If only she were still alive to tell him something, anything.

 A cloud passed before the sun. The room shook a little, adjusting its
outlines. The ball darkened and brightened again. He took it in his
hands, the old thing, scratched and crazed, and cracked along several
seams. It looked as if it had once been a flat bit of glass, and someone
had heated it, thinned and curled and patched it into this makeshift
gazing ball. A miracle it hadn't fallen apart. The shapes within shifted
as he tilted it this way and that, to try to surprise himself by a new
aspect. Catch a new angle, learn a new regret. Anything.

 He leaned down and breathed against it, and quickly wrote his name with
his finger in the condensation. It dissolved into shapes, his reflection
no longer sharp-lined, but foggy. Colored blobs like tossing petals.
Then they resolved. The lines he saw were not the carved cornices of the
wardrobe or the line where the ceiling met the walls. Instead he saw a
skylight, and walls of old cracking plaster, and a white cat observing
from the top of a crate. A man moved out of the margin of the mirror,
turning his tunic inside out in his haste to remove it. He was dark and
beautiful; Liir knew enough about the beauty of men to tell this. He
circled an arm about a woman and drew her toward the wall, where he
leaned down to kiss her. Then the man turned to open a wide
double-doored window, and a flood of light that was never seen in the
tower at Kiamo Ko burned into the room in the mirror.(Liir the young
soldier was outside, heading for Quadling Country, daydreaming in the
sun.) Their forms were indistinct in the sun flooding around them into
the room. The woman pulled back, away from the window frame, and raised
her arms around the man. Her face was hidden. Her arms were green.

 Liir set the mirror gently down. He turned as if to say to the white
cat,Hush, that's private--but the white cat was in the mirror, of course.

 Elphaba. Elphaba and Fiyero. Elphaba once upon a time, maybe not much
older than Liir was now. And Fiyero, Fiyero for sure. In the light of
that distant memory, captured somehow in a looking glass, one couldn't
mistake the pattern of blue diamonds that had been incised into Fiyero's
skin. Liir had envied how Nor had spoken so affectionately of her
father's blue-diamonded skin.

 Liir didn't want to see more. He was too constricted for prurience of
any sort, much less this kind. But he was young and normal--too normal--so
of course he had to look again. He was relieved to find that the
circumference of the ball was misting up, and in any case the picture
was different. It was the Witch now, the woman he had known so
well--fiercer, less forgiving, more impatient, more focused. She was
slapping the pages of the Grimmerie, looking for something she couldn't
find. Then she closed the book with awhomp so hard the globe almost
rocked on its stand, even now, at the memory of it.

 She turned and raised a crooked arm in the air above her, and her mouth
was open, but he could hear no sound; and the broom came rushing
forward, dragging its hems across the floor. The Witch wrenched it with
one strong hand and settled her rump firmly against the tied top of the
brush. They rose as a single instrument and left the room through the
broad window. The Great Kells--as they were a dozen or so years ago, as
they were today--seemed like fans of lavender and ice in the distance,
and he could make out her path for a few more seconds, trading on the
currents of the wind, after an impossible prize.

 

 HE SAID HISgood-byes to Nanny, though she seemed mercifully vacant this
afternoon. "Tell ‘em all to go to hell," she advised. "And save me a
good seat by the racetrack when they get there."

 Chistery saw him out. "You've no need to take this on yourself," he
repeated.

 "She would," he said.

 "You aren't her; you can't be, and shouldn't try."

 "Try to be her, or try to be me? There is a difference. Of course there
is. But I've got the broom now, haven't I? So who else should do it?"

 Chistery shrugged.

 "If the Princess of the Swans was presiding over a Conference of the
Birds, so that the flying creatures of the world could share what they
knew about the trouble ahead, you know who would be there. She would.
She flew on a broom. She qualified. So I'll go in her stead. I may not
have her blood, but I have her broom. I'm all there is."

 "Go with the winds," said Chistery. "Shall I save supper?"

 Liir put on Fiyero's boots. Hadn't he earned them?

 Or perhaps not. He took them off again and replaced them in the
wardrobe. But he did take the drawing of Nor, and fold it up, and tuck
it in an inside pocket of the cape, from where it could not blow away.

 He climbed to the windowsill in her old study and threw himself out,
trusting that the broom would remember its mission. His eyes closed
against the fall, and the crows sheltering under the eaves screeched in
shock and terror. The broom stumbled and pitched, rolled and yawed, but
Liir kept his boots kicked firmly in the straw and his hands iron-tight
around the pole. When after the first few seconds he had not yet whumped
into the side of Knobblehead Pike, he opened one eye.

 The landscape was a broken thing from this high up. The mountains
looked like mud, swept into ridges and painted white and brown and grey
and green. Thin flat lines of polished silver: rivers threading along
the valley floors. Almost as far as the eye could see, the Kells curved
north. The horizon beyond them was white as sugar crystal where the sun
made some fun of its own.

 To the south, Kumbricia's Pass was out of sight, hidden by the
shoulders of mountains between, but it wouldn't be hard to find from
this height.

 He wheeled about, vaguely southward, leaving Kiamo Ko for the second
time in his life. He didn't look back, for the whipping black cape would
interfere with his view anyway. To the east, invisible still, the
Emerald City, and all that went on there. To the south, a flat plate of
greenish brown. Maybe Kellswater in the distance already? That would put
Nether How beneath him, and the five lakes west of the Vinkus River. He
hadn't the nerve to look down, however; looking out and across was just
barely tolerable.

 He saw the first sign of the moon, and the weird hump of a snout it
had. The jackal moon, Nanny had told him; she'd hoped to get another
jackal moon in her long life. There it was, his first, or the first he
could remember anyway. It lay on the horizon to the southeast like a dog
with its nose on the threshold, barely obeying the instruction to stay
outside. It had a cold and a personal look to it.

 The wind played tricks in his ears: now a soughing like the breath of a
man in distress, now an indistinct glissando almost as of fingers on
purely tuned strings. From here one could see nothing of the works of
man in the world, and it was the more beautiful for it: how odd, then,
that the wind should still sound like human music. Or was it that human
music sounded more like the wind than people could possibly know?

 On his right, coming over the Kells from the west, three or four clots
of dark matter, indistinct because of the light and the wispy
streakiness of the skies. He paid the flotsam no mind until a skein of
cloud parted and they were nearer. Larger than he'd guessed; now he
could see they were still rather far off. But gaining in speed; and
gaining on him, slicing toward him in a wide curvet like hounds let
loose on the side of a meadow, and he the fox already moving broadly
down its middle.

 He used the force of his thumbs to press the wood of the broom pole
down, and as if possessed of a mind, or as if it had become part of his
own body, the broom obliged, and he lost altitude in a hurry. The larger
creatures would have a hard time adjusting their speed and height, he
thought, and he was right; they were less nimble. But the air below was
thicker with the water vapor and breath of forest. What they'd lost in
maneuverability, the hunting birds made up in greater weight; they
plunged toward him.

 Farther, and he dropped farther still, each time catching some small
advantage, to lose it within a few minutes. The four birds now penned
him in the air: two keeping slightly forward and below, one coming on
his left. Above--he could feel it with his peripheral judgment rather
than see it--the final one. And closing in fast, to judge by the pair of
shadows that he could see racing along the flatlands below: his shadow
and his pursuer's.

 There was nothing to lose by an attempt to buck sideways and zigzag;
with luck two of the dedicated missiles might collide, and each one
knock the other unconscious. But the broom didn't seem responsive
enough. A small amount of jerking up and kicking back made little
difference. The farther the drop, the slower the broom's response: the
more resistance put up by the moods of the climate.

 Now above the horizon the jackal moon was staring. It had risen as Liir
had descended, and their relative positions were reversed. It was the
head of a predator on the crouch, and he was the prey trying lucklessly
to make it to a mouse hole of one sort or another.

 The first attack was of talons, so Liir thought, eagles? Massive
eagles--and the second attack was by a tooth or a beak, which might have
meant anything. It ripped off the cape as if calmly unknotting it. Then
Liir turned to beat at the creature with his arms, since encounter was
inevitable, and he came face-to-face with a flying dragon. Roughly the
size of a horse, with wings of black and gold, and a venomous eye of
gold shot through with black where red should be.

 The other dragon neared, and the two of them made their nab neatly,
tossing Liir between them as his clothes shredded and his voice raveled.
Then, having worried him at last from the broom, they let him fall, and
retired with their spoils.

 The Emperor Apostle

_ One Plus One Equals Both_

 1

 HE HAD HAD EVERY INTENTION TO DIE,and music had forbidden it. He'd been
netted by melody not so much beguiling as nagging. That's what he
thought, when he could think about it. Though it was another few hours
or days (he couldn't count either) before even this much came clear to him.

 What he remembered from before his fall from the sky was imprecise at
best, and its emotional character muted. Panic over the sight of a girl
being slung from a burning bridge... sgust at realizing what Shell had
been up to in those cells at Southstairs. Consolation at seeing a stag
at the far side of a field in early autumn. Panic, disgust,
consolation--cheap souvenirs from a holiday. Emotions were portable and
obvious: small savories of a life, suitable for kicking his mood upswing
or down as the moment required. False, somehow.

 But he and his memories alike had awakened into a new capacity of pain
and grief. He had awakened to find himself alive again, damn it.
Couldn't he even fall from a great height and expect the comfort of a
quick death? Need Feckless Liir march on yet again?

 Though marching was hardly what he was doing, in literal terms, as he
tossed, and kicked the sour blankets in this abandoned mill building or
industrial outpost, wherever it was she had taken him.

 The girl was named Candle, she said. She spoke to him colloquially in
Qua'ati.

 She brought him water from a well outside. He could hear the squeak of
the pulley as the bucket went down, came back. She brought him nuts and
moss apples, which gave him a stentorian diarrhea at first, but cleaned
him out and started him up again, and before long he was able to sit up.
Then get up and piss in a pail. Then walk to the window and rub a shaky
hand against the dirt on the glass, and circle a clean space with his
palm, and look out.

 His resting room was off the kitchen of a small compound: a few stone
domestic buildings connected to dependences built at right angles to one
another. In the yard he saw the laundry cart to which Candle and that
ferociously old maunt had dragged him. Now the donkey was unhitched and
was grazing nearby in an overgrown orchard, braying opinions about
nothing in particular. Within a couple of days, out on her scouting
adventures, Candle had come up with a hen, too, and once the hen grew
familiar with her new home, there were eggs in the morning.

 "Is it a farmhold?" he asked her.

 "It was once," she said in her half-a-voice. "Old apple trees in the
woods, and dozens of barrels in a shed. I think it had been a cidery.
But it seems to have been fitted out for industry of some sort since.
I've found a... heap of machinery standing in the high main barn. It’s'been hacked with sledgehammers and I can't guess what job it was meant
to perform. When you can get around better, you can tell me what you think."

 Beyond the orchards and a few overgrown pastures, as far as he could
tell, they were surrounded by a forest. By day it was the color of a
hundred fawns, every afternoon brighter as more leaves fell and the
light sank nearer to the ground. By night, owls hooted, and in the
ceaseless wind the branches made sounds like coughing.

 He dozed much of the day and lay awake next to her much of the night,
when she fell into a sound sleep. She showed no sign of restlessness.
But then, he couldn't play an instrument to trouble her dreams. The
domingon, if that's what it was called, hung on the wall like an icon.

 "Why did you rescue me?" he asked her. She couldn't answer the
question; she seemed not to understand the concept of rescue, though the
word in Qua'ati could mean nothing else. "Who are you?" he tried,
another way of posing the earlier question. The reply, "Candle," nothing
else, gave him something close to comfort, but it was not comfort, quite.

 Another time he asked, "Why did we flee that place?"

 "The old maunt told us to go. She said they would hunt for you sooner
or later."

 "They? Who?"

 "Perhaps I misunderstood. Anyway, she said you were in danger. She had
heard tell of this abandoned place and gambled that the donkey would
find the way. Indeed, it did."

 "I am still in danger? Then I'd have been safer if you'd let me die."

 "I didn't cause you to live or die," she said. "Don't give me credit
for skills beyond me. I played music; you remembered. Music will do
that. What you remembered--that was within you, and nothing to do with me."

 But he wondered, as he grew stronger. So many of his memories included
an offstage trickle of melody, like marginalia embroidering a page of
manuscript. He hardly recognized himself in the glass of the window,
when at night he took a candle to the black pane to see who he was now.
Gaunt, and stubbled, almost palsied with the weakness of the infirm. Had
her playing helped him to remember his life as it had been lived, or had
she enchanted him with music and given him a false past?

 He could be anyone, this could be anywhere. He might be mad, and not
even know it. There might be no Emperor, no dragons, no broom--no castle
of Kiamo Ko before that, no Nor abducted from it a half a lifetime ago.
No occupying force in the provincial capital of Qhoyre. No parents
slinging their daughter clear of the burning bridge. Candle might have
riveted his comatose mind with a battery of pretend memories so as to
distract him from something more important.

 Though she spoke Qua'ati, and so did he. She wasn't likely to be that
skilled a player that she could have taught him a whole new language in
his coma.

 2

 THE FIRST NIGHT HE COULD MANAGE IT,they pulled two chairs into the open
doorway to watch the stars come out. "Tell me about yourself," he said.

 She lit a candle, charmingly. Even more wonderfully, she pulled a
bottle of wine from out of nowhere. "Mother Yackle gave it me, along
with a few other things filched from the mauntery's pantry," she
admitted. It took some ingenuity to remove the cork, but when they'd
succeeded, they sat with their legs entwined, and sipped from old clay
mugs with broken handles.

 She told of her past. He tried to listen. After a while he realized
that he was waiting for clues to prove that he had been comatose for
several years, not merely weeks. He wanted her to be the Quadling girl
tossed from the bridge at Bengda, grown up and magically restored not
just to life but intohis life. How he wanted to provide for her--to begin
the impossible task of reparation.

 It was hard to shake off this hope, but in order to hear of Candle's
real life, he had to try to still his own rackety guilt.

 Candle was raised in Ovvels, in all of Oz the southernmost town of any
size. Well, hardly a town, as she described it: a network of cabanas
built in the rubbery limbs of suppletrees above the salty damp of
flooded groves. As a child she hunted charfish with her spear. Like most
of Quadling Country, her settlement had become economically blighted in
the decades of the Wizard's ascendancy. She thought prosperity must once
have been possible here: great tiers of granite blocks, eighteen feet at
their highest, were set together in long broad curves. One could have
driven a horse along the top for nearly a mile. Nobody alive could
imagine what such massive structures had been used for, nor how they had
been erected; there was no granite anywhere nearby. The locals used the
place for fixing their marsh nets and for drying fish.

 Beyond that, Candle had little else to say. Her father had lit out long
ago, her mother being rather wiftier than was useful in a wife. Food had
grown scarce, and some of her relatives had set out to try their luck as
itinerants. She'd learned to play the domingon while traveling with her
uncle.

 "But how did you come to stay in a mauntery?" asked Liir. "The
Quadlings aren't unionists."

 "In general, Quadlings are inexpressive about holy matters," said
Candle, "which means they're not easily offended by other traditions.
However, you're wrong about southern Quadlings. A whole passel of
Quadlings from Ovvels converted to a kind of unionism several
generations ago when a missionary and his entourage came through. I
heard my great-grandmother speak of it once. A sickly group of
do-gooders, prone to being afflicted with mold in our climate. Frankly,
it's a wonder they had any effect. But they did. I was raised on a
cushiony variety of unionist thought, so I don't mind the chapel and the
devotions that the maunts engaged in. Nor the custom of caring for the
sick, either. It seems a decent way to spend one's hours."

 "You played for me on that--domingon. Where is it from?"

 "It was a gift of my uncle," said Candle tersely, and would answer no
further questions on the subject of the instrument or her uncle, either.

 "You cared beautifully for me." Liir noted the rue in his voice. "I
remember what it was like to fall through the air and see the ground
rush up with a speed you can't imagine. It was all a brown blur of wind
and earth."

 "I couldn't have saved you if you had fallen very far," said Candle.
"Likely you imagine it worse than it was."

 "But my bones are healed. I can move," he said. "I didn't bleed to death."

 "The maunts who tended you first were more capable than they let on. In
any case, I am still not clear on why you came to be airborne," said Candle.

 He ripped the skin off a wild winter orange she had found in the woods
somewhere. The pungency stung his nose with eclipsing sweetness. "With
all I seemed to relive in my dead sleep, there's a lot I can't
remember," he said at last.

 "Do you remember what happened to your broom?"

 "I suspect it fell to the ground. I'm not sure. Or maybe the dragons
took it, though why they'd bother I can't imagine."

 She didn't press him further. It was Liir who did the asking. "Why did
you take me away from there? Why did that one you called Mother Yackle
lock us in the tower together, and release us when she did? What did she
say to you about it?"

 "Mother Yackle is well known to be wandering in her mind. In the short
time since I arrived at the mauntery, I never knew her to cause trouble
nor even, often, to speak. Somehow your arrival engaged her, though
whether it was into a further madness or a mysterious clarity, I can't
say. Perhaps we were locked in so... 
 "Finish your thought."

 She couldn't, or wouldn't. She merely smiled at Liir. "It's nice to
speak Qua'ati again. They thought I was simple at the mauntery. I didn't
mind that, really; I suppose I am simple. And my small voice doesn't
lend itself to public utterance. But I find it is nice to speak with
words again, as well as with music."

 "How did you learn your skill with music?"

 "We all have skills," she said. "I mean the Quadlings from Ovvels do.
They emerge in different ways. We can--see things--is that how to put it?"

 "Can you see the future?" said Liir. He gripped her hand. "What is our
future?"

 She blushed a little; he hadn't known a Quadling who could blush. "It
isn't like that," she answered. "I can tell you--I suppose--a little bit
about the present. It's not the future."

 "Tell me about the present," he said.

 "I did already." She pouted, a jest only. "I sat by your side for days
and days and played the domingon to you. It gave you your present."

 "You gave me memory. That's the past."

 She corrected him. "Memory is part of the present. It builds us up
inside; it knits our bones to our muscles and keeps our heart pumping.
It is memory that reminds our bodies to work, and memory that reminds
our spirits to work, too: it keeps us who we are. It is the influence
that keeps us from flying off into separate pieces like"--she looked
around--"like this peel of orange, and that clutch of pips."

 "Play for me again."

 "I'm tired of playing," she said. "For now, anyway."

 Before they went back inside, they explored the high-ceilinged barn.
"I'll look again in better light tomorrow," said Liir after poking
around a bit. "But I think this was a printing press."

 "Out here in an old farmhouse in the middle of nowhere?" said Candle.

 "Maybe it printed seditious tracts," said Liir. "Someone didn't like
what it was being used for, and expressed that opinion with an ax and a
hammer."

 "From pressing cider to publishing broadsides."

 "Both are presses. This is Apple Press Farm. I'm naming it."

 They retired. Candle fell asleep quickly. Liir rolled up against her
for warmth. I am not a soldier any longer, he said to himself; this is
not my Qua'ati girlfriend. He stiffened, as a man will, but took pains
to govern the appetite. She was his rescuer and not his concubine. He
might be infected with something contagious, and he wouldn't endanger
her that way.

 When it seemed that the sweet lettucey smell of her breathing, the roll
of her breast in the moonlight was too much to bear--that he would sink
his mouth upon it--he turned onto his side. A minute or two of
envisioning the burning bridge at Qhoyre was all it took to restore him
to the sadder state in which he'd spent most of his life.

 3

 IN NOON LIGHT,the mess in the main barn proved more severe. Dozens of
trays of letters used by compositors in a back room--once a milking stall
maybe--were overturned on the floor. The wheels and weights and great
drum of the press proper, cabineted in well-oiled oak and well-blackened
brackets and footings of iron, had been gashed, and fairly recently, by
swords or axes. The metal cuts gleamed with as yet untarnished brilliance.

 They saw no sign of blood. Perhaps the obscure printers had gotten wind
of an assault and cleared out in time.

 Liir poked about in the charred rubble of the barn hearth. He managed
to dislodge a few scraps of a broadsheet. He pointed to the words, but
Candle said that she couldn't read the script.

 "‘Pieties of the Apostle,'" Liir told her. "That's the heading. Here,
beneath, it says ‘The Virtue of the UGLY.'"

 "I didn't know the ugly had special virtue," said Candle, "just a sort
of misfortune."

 The print was small and Liir had to carry it to the open door in order
to make it out. "It seems a blameless sort of religious tract, near as I
can tell."

 "Perhaps the press was used for more incendiary publications, too."

 "Maybe." He rubbed away char and declaimed from the parchment: "‘The
Apostle boasts no special skill. For his humility the Unnamed God has
blessed him with the reward of untroubled conviction.'"

 "I told you," said Candle, "we're already converted. I don't need a
further catechism."

 She left to gather firewood, and when she returned a few hours later
leading a goat, Liir said, "You are systematically raiding some nearby
farm, aren't you? Is that why you have been carrying your domingon with
you?"

 "There are a few holdings in these hills, farther up," she admitted.
"Mostly they're abandoned at that time of the morning, but it's true:
the instrument helps lull any resident grandfather into his morning nap."

 "I hope you're not beggaring them."

 "Should I bring it back?"

 Milk. Cheese, in time? "No."

 But what were they doing here? Resting up--for what?

 "I've been scrutinizing such flecks of pages as I could salvage," he
told her. "I've come to think this circular was not a missionary tract.
I think it's oppositional. You just don't see it at first--you read some
ways down and begin to find resistance to the notions of the Apostle.
It's a clever rhetorical device, in its way; it may have fooled some
readers, or convinced others to join a resistance to--this Apostle,
whoever he is. It's seditious, this paper, that's what it is. And
whoever didn't like it traced its origins here, and made their
sentiments known."

 "I hope they don't come back."

 "What're they going to come back for? The goat?"

 She rolled her eyes. "Do you know anything about milking goats?"

 "I learned to fly on a broom," he said, rolling up his sleeves. "I can
learn to milk a goat, I bet." Though flying on a broom proved to be the
easier task, he found.

 4

 CANDLE SAID EVENTUALLY,"The weather is steadily chilling. If we're
going to be here all winter we're going to need to get in some firewood.
Are you feeling well enough to begin to collect some?"

 He was, and he did. In finding his way around the browning dales and
hollows, he realized that the press had been set up in a farm that most
likely had been abandoned a generation ago. Rangy teenager trees were
colonizing some of the pastures, and deeper in the woods, the
crisscrossing of stone walls suggested that these had been working
meadows not all that long ago.

 At suppertime he told Candle what he'd seen. "I don't know much about
how land is used anywhere but Ovvels," she admitted. "I have seen those
walls among the trees, and I thought perhaps they grew there like lichen."

 "The influence of pebbles! To grow stone walls. Wouldn't it be nice if
you could plant a farm that way! Drop the seeds of a barn here, drip a
tincture of millpond in an eyedropper over there. Plant an egg and get a
whole henhouse, complete with cockcrow and breakfast omelet."

 "What would make a sheepfold?"

 "All you need is a lamb's tail."

 "How horrible!"

 "Not really. To avoid fly strike, shepherds often dock the tails of lambs."

 She didn't like this line of play. She got her domingon--Liir guessed as
much to change the subject as anything else. He needled her anyway. "To
grow a mauntery you'd have to plant a... what?"

 She struck up a tonic depressive and then played it backward. "Plant a
prayer," she said, despite herself. "To grow an army... 

 "Touché. Well, the story of the Seven Spears says you plant dragons'
teeth." He'd heard the folk story eventually, the one that had given the
company of the Seventh Spear its name. A bit close for comfort, that.
"To grow a melody?"

 "You can't grow a melody on purpose," she said, and slyly added, "you
have to plant an accidental." This seemed a musical reference, and it
went over his head. "To grow a memory. Tell me that one, mister magic
farmer."

 "To grow a memory. To grow a memory, one must plant... m'not sure. Who
wants to grow memories, anyway?"

 "I'll make it easier. To grow a good memory. A happy memory."

 He shrugged, indicating, Go on.

 "It doesn't matter what you plant," she concluded, "but you must plant
it with love."

 Then she whipped up a scale and finished with some splay-handed chord
clusters. The sounds hung in the air like prisms suspended from the
trees on invisible strings. The donkey brayed in an altogether more
accomplished voice than usual, looking astonished at himself. The goat
cocked her head.

 Candle added a few grace notes in a complementary modality.

 The hen stepped closer as if surprised, at her age and station, to
receive an invitation to dance. She let out a squawk that turned into a
nightingale's sonnet, line after line after line, though Liir couldn't
imagine what it meant.

 Candle added a hedge of bass notes, tense as the girders of a bridge.
The goat opened her mouth and provided an alto obbligato line--rather
huskier than would work for a paying audience, but entirely serviceable
in a barnyard.

 Then the Quadling girl sang something in Qua'ati--some rural advice;
Liir had to struggle both to hear her and to translate. He guessed she
was singing, "No one can sing unless they can remember." The trio of
animals attempted a big harmonic finish, but it was beyond them, and the
moment passed.

 "You can make the animals sing," he said. "You are a wonder."

 "I can play a wonderful instrument," she corrected him. "To grow a
song, you must plant a note."

 

 THE NEXT DAYhe went for more kindling. His strength returning little by
little, he scaled another rise, a higher one than before. He saw in the
distance a blurred line of tree heads a different shade of brown. The
oakhair forest, in that direction, and, when he turned to see, the
suggestion of the Kells in the other.

 He collected what he could comfortably carry, not yet having regained
full strength, and put off what needed to be said another day or two.
Before he could bring the matter up, though, Candle got there first.

 She said, "It's a month now since we left the mauntery, and you dropped
out of the sky perhaps two weeks before that. I've been nursing you as
best I could, and I've assumed we'd winter here together. But is that a
false premise? You ought to let me know. I must decide if I want to try
to stay here alone through the winter, or return to the mauntery."

 "Why would I leave?" he asked, looking for a reason.

 She tried to lighten the mood. "To grow a man, you must not only plant
a child, but harvest it," she said. "You're not done yet. Are you?" When
he didn't answer her, she added, "You ask why you would leave. But I
ask, why would you stay?"

 "I owe you that much."

 "You owe me nothing." She looked as if she meant it, seeming neither
combative nor proprietary. "I did the job that was set me by the
Superior Maunt, that's all. Though maybe in evacuating you from that
keep and bringing you here I exceeded my charge, and endangered you the
further."

 "I can't be in danger here. Look, what? Are the very elm leaves going
to wreathe up by magic and smother me?"

 "Something attacked you six weeks ago, and for a reason," she reminded him.

 "I had a flying broom. Of all things. No reason more than that."

 "You had the power to fly on it, too."

 "Any ant has the power to wander aboard an eagle."

 She demurred, but didn't want to argue. "You were going somewhere.
Surely you remember by now?"

 "A Conference. A Conference of Birds in the eastern entrance to
Kumbricia's Pass. Though I have no way of knowing exactly when it was
formally opening, nor how long it would last. It could be over already."

 She sat down. "If I understood what I picked up in the mauntery, we
aren't that far from the eastern edge of the Kells."

 "No. A few hours by broomstick, I guess. A few days, maybe, on foot."

 "There's the donkey."

 "Two weeks on the singing donkey. He seems very lazy."

 "You're still weak. You ought to ride."

 "You're pushing me out of the nest?" He was relieved, in a way: someone
was making a decision for him. Or perhaps she wanted to hear from his
lips that he wouldn't abandon her, he wouldn't consider it.

 Her thinking was further along than that. "I don't know if you want to
stay with me for a day, or for longer, or at all," she admitted. "But
you should choose what you want and not just fall into it. I abducted
you, after a fashion. I will not keep you."

 "I'll give myself permission to stay here."

 "You'll settle your curiosity first," she told him. "You don't know why
you were attacked, really. You don't know what the Conference was for,
nor what it might mean to the Birds that you didn't arrive. You should
find out that before you make any other decisions."

 "I'm not that selfless anymore. Anytime I try, I fail. I learned
failure early, and mastered it."

 "Be selfish then. Ask those Birds if they have seen your friend. That Nor."

 He could hardly believe her generosity. He loved Candle already but
didn't have the perspective to know if it was as a savior, a woman, a
friend, an alternative to loneliness. Or all of those together. Or if
any of those were the right reason to love someone. Well, what personal
experience of love had he ever had? And what testimony of love had ever
been paraded before him? Precious little.

 He knew in many ways Candle was right and that, also, she was giving
him a way out.

 "I need firewood. If you help me with firewood," she said, "I'll stay
here the winter and not leave till spring. Between the fruits and
mushrooms I've been drying, the potatoes growing wild in the sunny patch
yonder, and what the goat and the hen can provide, I won't starve. If
I'm turned out by some landlord, or if trouble chases me away, I'll
return to the mauntery. I can be found there, by my uncle if he comes to
claim me, or by you. Or there I'll stay, maybe; it's as good a life as
most, and they're kind women."

 He helped with the firewood, redoubling his efforts to build up the
stockpile, and in so doing restoring mass to his muscles and strength to
his step. By the time the first hard frost came, and the chimney was
issuing its thin braid of smoke all hours of the day and night, he was
ready to leave.

 He wouldn't take the donkey. She might need it.

 "For what?" she asked.

 "He's better company than the goat," said Liir at last. He took Candle
in his arms on the final morning, and kissed her fondly for the first
time. "I do not need to hear about goodness from any Apostle," he told
her. "You have given me more to admire than almost anyone I have ever met."

 "It's very clear you haven't traveled the world," she chided him,
almost lovingly. "Be safe, as safe as you can, dear Liir: and be brave."

 "Are we a couple?" he asked, bravely enough.

 "We are one and one," she said. "In Quadling thinking, one plus one
doesn't equal a single unit of two. One plus one equals both."

 For a long time, turning back, he could see the soft curl of smoke
hovering over where Apple Press Farm must stand in its encroaching
forest. The fire's breath hung like a question mark above the place that
she had planted herself, already, to wait for his return.

_ The Conference of the Birds_

 1

 WHILE THE TREK FROMthe farmstead in the woods to the start of
Kumbricia's Pass was short, comparatively speaking, every step he took
bit at his bones and taxed his joints in a way that none of the long
forays across country had seemed to do before.

 Well, he was older. Hardlyold yet--twenty-three, was he, or twenty-four?
Something like that. Not old enough to feel like an adult, really, but
old enough to look like one, and to know the distinction between being
carefree and careless.

 So he took care. Any little scatter of stones might shift beneath his
weight, any patch of grass might prove more slippery than it ought. He
latched his eyes to the ground. Confidence and stamina returned all too
slowly.

 But return they did. Eventually he was walking two hours at a stretch
before pausing to rest. He fixed his gaze to the horizon and willed
himself forward by setting himself serial destinations. That tallest
blue pine, that nubble of grasses in the upland meadow, that outcrop of
granite. Before long, the prospect grew grander, as the Kells swam into
clearer focus, and the steep cut between them saidKUMBRICIA ‘S PASS:
enter if you dare.

 He remembered his childhood journey with Oatsie Manglehand and the
Grasstrail Train, and how the travelers had traded tales. Fierce
Kumbricia, the witch from the oldest tales of Oz! Kumbricia was so
ancient a figure of lore that she seemed freed from the limitations of
any particular moral position. She was not exactly the demon crone from
hell, intent on the destruction of mortal souls, nor was she the nodding
grand-tit of the world, providing succor in times of trial. Or perhaps,
more truly said, she was both. One plus one equals both. Like the most
insouciant and playful of earthquakes, collapsing villages and crushing
populations, Kumbricia's actions followed her own secret intentions. To
a human, what might look like luck one minute was disaster the next, but
what meant luck to Kumbricia, or disaster either? In the stories she was
fierce, amoral, wholly herself. Unvanquishable and incorrigible.

 And unknowable, really.

 Like the Unnamed God, when you came right down to it.

 Occasionally, Nanny had singsonged, as a nursery ditty, something
probably derived from the Oziad or some other baroque history-legend.

 Kumbricia stirs the pot, and licks the ladle,

 Sets the table, pours a glass of tears.

 Waits beside the ominous vacant cradle.

 Waiting still. She can wait for years.

 Yes, just like the Unnamed God.

 2

 THE CLIFFS OPENED BEFOREhim and then closed behind him, for the track
into Kumbricia's Pass took several quick turns along the valley floor
before it began to rise. The ground breathed different vapors here, and
the season was delayed: the browning leaves of the trees hadn't fallen
yet. Not enough wind could wend through to tear them away.

 The brightness of the sky was shattered into glazed mosaic bits by the
fretwork of branches and foliage. This high-slung canyon went on for
days, didn't it?--wasn't that his recollection? Until it opened on the
western slope of the Kells, and the Thousand Year Grasslands spread out
as broad as the imaginary sea from children's stories? How would he ever
find traces of a convocation of Birds in this secret haven?

 But a good place to gather, he had to concede. The mountains served as
ramparts, and the ravine was helpfully overgrown. Here the Yunamata made
their home most of the year. And here Elphaba and Liir had picked out
their way all those ages ago, pressing on toward Kiamo Ko and the hope
for sanctuary.

 He had all the time for rumination he needed--and then some. What had he
understood, then, of Elphaba's drive? Her need? The force that pushed
her around? Precious little. But he remembered the day she had saved the
infant Snow Monkey, who would become Chistery. Her native--talent? power?
skill at concentration?--or maybe, merely, compassion?--had caused a small
lake to ice over so she half walked, half slid across it to collect the
abandoned, fretting monkey baby.

 That's what his memory said.The very ice formed under her heels. The
world conformed itself to suit her needs. But how could this possibly be
true? Perhaps it was the unreliability of memory, the romanticking
tendencies of childhood, that made Liir remember it this way.The lake
went ice. The baby monkey was saved . Maybe, really, she'd waded. Or
maybe the lake was already iced over.

 Maybe all that really mattered, as to her power, was thatshe saved the
baby monkey .

 At the shores of a small tarn, he paused, and became aware of a new
variety of silence. It was the sound of everything holding its breath.

 At the farther side of the tarn was a small island. A spinney of
knot-branch trees grew in the center of the island, their five or six
tree trunks so close as to resemble the uprights of a series of doors,
all leading to the same interior space among the trunks, some dozen feet
in diameter. The trees held what was left of the Conference of the
Birds, and the Birds were holding their breath.

 He stood, not ready to call out, for he didn't want them to scatter.
But they were aware of him, he was sure. How many hundred pairs of eyes
blinked or unblinked at him from those ring-coiled leaves? They neither
approached him in sortie nor twittered in fright. Perhaps, he guessed,
they were stupid with fear.

 Finally he thrashed about along the bracken and located a fallen tree
trunk substantial enough to bear his weight. He hauled it to the water's
edge and pushed it in. No conjuring up an ice-walk for him. With the
help of a staff, he balanced himself and began to draw his way across
the water. He could have swum, he knew, but that would require his
undressing either before or after the swim, and it seemed an undignified
way to approach a Convention.

 The Birds seemed patient, and as he got closer he thought: It's as if
they have been waiting for me.

 This was so, according to the hunch-hooded Cliff Eagle who bade him
welcome.

 "You're the boy-broomist," he said. "The fledgling. We knew you'd been
downed. A Red Pfenix got far enough through enemy lines to cry out that
much information before being wounded and having to turn back. We
trusted you would come. You've come."

 The Cliff Eagle paused smartly, puffing out his breast feathers.

 "I almost didn't," said Liir. "It wasn't even my idea, really."

 The Eagle made a mouth gesture as close to a sneer as he could manage.
"Humans are fickle. We know. But you're here. The boy-broomist."

 "I'm without the broom." Liir put his staff down on the ground so the
Birds could see. "I walked. Have you a name, by the way?"

 The other Birds hopped a branch or two closer to see if the Cliff Eagle
would answer. They were the larger creatures, mostly--a few random
Finches and Fitches, some Robins, and a busy preening department of
Wrens--but mostly Eagles, Night Rocs, a youngish Pfenix in its glowing
halo. Nine Swans still waiting for their Princess. A blind old Heron
with a twisted left leg. Others.

 "I know what happened to the Princess of the Swans," said Liir, and
told them how he had buried her--and, in a dim sense, come in her stead.

 The Cliff Eagle took the news unflinchingly, though the Swans bowed
their heads until their necks were white hoops, and their wings
shuddered with an airy sound, as of an industrial baffle.

 "I am the President of the Assembly," said the Cliff Eagle. "Thank you
for coming."

 Liir had no use for honorifics. "Am I to call you Mister President? Or
just Birdy?"

 The Cliff Eagle bristled, and then said, "General Kynot is my name,
though my name isn't important. And yours isn't either. We're soldiers
at strategy, not a military tea."

 "Well, I've been a soldier and I'm not going back to it. I'm Liir, for
what that's worth, and I use my name. I'm not Broom-boy."

 Kynot ducked his head and bit at a nit under his wing. "Sorry, the
place is crawling with nits," he said. "Liir." It was a concession, and
Liir relaxed. He was about to ask permission to sit down, and then
remembered he didn't need it. So he sat, and the Birds came farther down
from the branches, and most of them settled on the hardscuffle with the
sound of small loaves of bread falling to a floor.

 Kynot made quick work of their concerns. The Conference seemed to be
comprised of seventy or eighty Birds who were now afraid to leave. They
had met to convene about the threat in the skies, but that very threat
had cornered them and grounded them. It would take a talent and a
cunning greater than any of their skills to make the skies safe for travel.

 "You've come to the wrong beak if you want talent or cunning," said Liir.

 "Don't be absurd," snapped Kynot, and continued.

 He beat out every point of his argument with a hard flap of his
wings.Whereas conditions of life under the Emperor had become
intolerable,whereas his airborne army of dragons had systematically
disrupted air travel, unsettled populations of Birds and birds, and
interfered with the natural rights of flight and migration and
convocation,now therefore a Congress of the Birds had been summoned, if
sadly beleaguered by aforementioned hostile army, and such delegates as
had managed to sneak in had concludedthereby that they were singly and
in unity incapable of combating the enemy fleet.Therefore they needed
help. Fast.

 "I came to tell you of the death of the Princess of the Swans," said
Liir, "because it is what Elphaba would have done. Beyond that, I can't
be of much use. If I'm the only hope around, you're in a heap of trouble."

 "Unlike Animals, we Birds haven't often lived wing by jowl with
humans," replied the general. "The human prohibition against eating
Animal flesh being subject to abuse, think how much less strict is any
taboo against eating the Bird of the air. We must be shot at and brought
down before we can be interviewed to learn if we are talking creatures.
Few hungry farmers are willing to extend Birds that courtesy, so those
of us who talk tend to congregate in areas less frequented by human
scum. My apologies, that was crude of me."

 "Don't apologize too fast, you don't know me very well," said Liir.
"But still, why ask me for help?"

 "You have flown, as most humans have not," said Kynot simply. "You have
powers unique among the humans we've met... 
 "I can keep my balance. So what. It's the broom that has powers.
Elphaba's broom."

 "The wing doesn't work separately from the feather, Liir. They work in
tandem."

 "Well, I haven't the broom any longer, or haven't you heard? So I can't
fly--which means this hardly concerns me."

 "You were attacked by the dragons yourself. Weren't you? Or have I been
fed misinformation?"

 "Well, I was. But that's between me and the dragons. It has nothing to
do with you."

 "And they call us birdbrains." Kynot was livid. "There is a common
cause among our kind and a flying boy, you dodo."

 "I object," said a Dodo, just waking up from a nap.

 "Sorry, that was uncalled for. Listen. Liir. You must have been
intending to help us, or why did you come here at all?"

 He thought of Candle. "It was the suggestion of a third party."

 "A suggestion of what? That you deliver your tragic news, and then stay
to laugh at us in our plight? That you see your fellow creatures chased,
tortured, kept from associating freely, just as you were chased, robbed,
and nearly killed, and then you--what? Walk home and retail the event for
amusing dinnertime conversation?"

 "Don't paint me so bleakly. I'm capable of doing that for myself. Look,
it's occurring to me that I might ask something of you. On and off over
the years, I've been looking for someone. A girl-child. Perhaps you
could help. On your various migrations and such."

 "We can't fly freely, or haven't I put that clearly enough, you
cretin?" Kynot was apoplectic. "How can we serve your private needs when
our numbers are being diminished by the day?"

 "Well, then." Liir shrugged. "It's a no-go. I guess I didn't really
understand much about this skirmish involving the Birds. It's sad, but
it hasn't anything to do with me. And even if it did, I'm powerless... m'not Elphaba."

 A small Wren hopped forward and said to Kynot, "If you please, begging
your pardon, General... 
 "Do not beg my pardon! Do notbeg at all! How many times have I to drill
this lesson into your brain, Dosey?"

 "Sorry, Gen'ral. Begging your pardon for that one, too. It's just that
the young man might want to think on this bit somewhat." Dosey turned to
Liir and cheeped. "It ain't just us Birdys, mister. Those dragonfings
are bad cess for human beings, too. Scraping the faces of defenseless
women in the wilderness! Have they no shame? Have you? If you cain't
helpus out of the kindness of your liver, surely you could work to keep
such things from happenin‘ to your own kind?"

 "Well said, Dosey." Kynot sounded less apologetic than surprised.

 "Those were unionist missionaries, I'm told," said Liir, his shoulders
slumping. "It was horrible to hear about. But I'm not a maunt, and I
don't even know if I'm a unionist."

 "So what next? They'll kill your brother in his stockings, and you'll
say, ‘He had grey eyes and I have green, so it weren't really about me
a'tall'?" asked the Wren. "They already attacked you, duckie, so's I
heard. Ain't you rememberin‘?"

 "Maybe I deserved to be attacked."

 "Oh, save us," muttered Kynot. "Somebody save us. But it's not going to
be this nutter."

 Dosey wasn't ready to give up. "Mebbe you did deserve it," she snapped.
"But that's giving those dragons an awful lot of credit for knowing the
insides and the sinsides of your soul! So what if they fly out of the
stables of the Emperor! They're not Talking Dragons! They're in the pay
of the Emperor of the Ugly! And you cain't be sartain those young maunts
deserved what they got, can you? Their faces so scraped! It's hideous is
what it is!"

 "It's not for me to decide whose faces get scraped or not... 
 "No," said Kynot. He reared up and looked as if he wanted to peck
Liir's eyes out. "No. Leave it in the beak of the Unnamed God, or his
mortal avatar, the Emperor. Leave it to the agents of the Emperor, who
run the Home Guard for the security of the Emerald City at the expense
of all others who live in Oz. Or leave it to the underlings who follow
the orders of their superiors. Leave it in the beaks of the dragons
themselves. Dragons don't kill people, people kill people. They kill
themselves by walking unprotected in a world where there are dragons.
You make me sick."

 "I don't have any idea why the dragons attacked those maunts--"

 "It is increasingly obvious that you don't have any ideas at all. The
dragons attacked the maunts to stir up trouble between the Yunamata and
the Scrow. Those human populations had finally positioned themselves to
be ripe for treaty making, after ten hundred generations... ey had been
learning to trust each other. With random attacks on isolated humans,
the dragons could keep the tribes suspicious of each other. Tribes are
easier to intimidate when they are not united. You said you were in the
military: didn't you learn anything about military strategy?"

 Liir thought about the burning bridge. He could see again the letter of
burning straw, changing shape as it fell, spelling something fiery and
illegible into the vanquishing water.

 He thought about Candle, waiting for him to return--having done
something. Having completed some action. If Liir assumed he wanted
Candle, and how could he know that yet?--he couldn't have her. Not until
he had an alternative against which to make a choice.

 "Look," he said. "Flattering, all this. But I can't fly anymore. My
broom is gone. I risked having my face scraped by coming solo across the
Disappointments as far as Kumbricia's Pass. I came for the wrong
reasons--as usual. There's nothing I can do for you, even if I am a
human. I have no talent. My broom had great talent!--if it even was my
broom. But it's gone. Either the dragons took it, or it's lost.

 "Listen. Keep listening. Wipe that squawky look off your faces. Please.
Why don't you band together to fly out of here? A huge clot of you? The
dragons couldn't take you all out--some of you would be bound to get
through."

 "Nice," said a small Barn Owl. "Very nice. I have an irregular left
wing and I tend to fly in loops, which slows me down. I'll be one of the
first to go. Gladly shall I sacrifice myself for the great Conference of
Birds!" He didn't sound as if he meant it.

 "While there are grubs to eat here in Kumbricia's Pass, and the dragons
can't see into our hideout, we are imprisoned here," said Kynot. "But to
leave would be to risk even one of us--and that is a risk we don't take.
We won't. The least little Sparrow that falls diminishes us all. I
thought you knew all about that."

 "Yeah, well, my religious instruction was pretty feeble."

 "I wasn't speaking metaphorically, but of military strategy. You could
get to the dragons, couldn't you? A witch-boy passing as a soldier? You
could see if they had your broom, for one. You could get it back. You
could be our voice--our ambassador. Our human representative, our agent,
our proxy--"

 Liir interrupted. "If I could get my broom--what good could I do? They
would just attack me again. Last time they were satisfied with my broom
and my cape. Maybe this time they'd scrape my face."

 "You just said it's not up to you to decide whose face gets scraped or
not," said the Cliff Eagle. "If you believe that, put your face out
there and deal with what happens."

 "This isn't going to work," said Liir. "I can't do anything for you.
I'm not a Bird. I'm not a witch-boy. I don't even have a broom anymore.
And even if I had it, maybe I wasn't meant to fly. Maybe I shouldn't
even have that liberty."

 "Maybe none of us should have the liberties we have. We keep going as
we are, we'll find out soon enough. But if you help us squelch the
dragon threat, we'll do what you ask. We'll hunt for that human female
you're seeking."

 The Wren hopped forward again. "You're going to do it," she said to
Liir. "You're going to try, ain't you. I kin tell."

 "You read the future, Dosey?" said Liir.

 "Begging your pardon, sir--"

 "Dosey!" interrupted Kynot. "No begging!"

 "Ooh, sorry I'm sure," Dosey continued. "No, Mister Broom-boy. You're
going to do it for a perfectly selfish reason--our looking for your lost
girl-fing--and that's okay. Why not? Long as the job gets done."

 The Birds were silent.

 "You've had a taste of it," she said in a softer voice. "Not many has,
but you has. You've tried flying, ain't you. Now try giving it up."

 She came nearer. "Try giving it up," she said. "Begging your pardon,
sir, you cain't."

 The Birds began to flap their wings and, one by one, to lift up, making
their final argument. They swept counterclockwise around the dead little
lake, perhaps in deference to the Owl whose wing anomaly made him list
in a particular direction. There were more Birds than Liir had first
perceived. Several hundred. The more timid ones must have been hiding
higher in the branches, but listening intently: all listening. Now they
flew, and as they flew, there could be no leader, no follower: they
traced the same track in the air, faster and faster. The very force of
their rhythmic pumping made the surface of the lake stand up in waves of
its own, higher and higher, till wingtips of white froth were beaten up,
and then the clots of pale spume lifted and circled beneath the vortex
of birds like a second population, like ghost Birds, like the relatives
of the Conference who had been slain. But what were ghosts without voices?

 The birds were silent--none of them, even the Geese and Ducks, who liked
to honk in flight, dared risk attracting attention to their stronghold.

 "Stop," cried Liir and held up his hands--not out of pity, nor fear, nor
a new moral conviction: simply out of the lack of any further reason to
resist.

 The blind, gimpy Heron hobbled forward and pecked at Liir's leg to
locate him. "I can't fly either, now my sight's gone," the Heron said.
"Makes me no less a Bird, though, do it?"

_ Kumbricia's Cradle_

 1

 THE WALK BACK WAS FASTER.Now that his bones were knitted, all this
trekking was building up muscle again. He hurt, but solidly, recuperatively.

 The Disappointments afforded little by way of a blind, so he traveled
by night as much as he could, hoping that dragons wouldn't be abroad
then. He tried to keep to clearly marked tracks, goat paths, stream
sides, where the going was smoother, though the cover less useful.

 Arriving back at Apple Press Farm an hour shy of dawn, he was unwilling
to frighten Candle by approaching in the dark. He found an old tree on
the edge of the orchard still forcing out small, deformed fruit, and he
made a breakfast for himself, shivering with his hands in his armpits.
He tried to feel the day warm instant by instant as the sun rose over
the horizon, but his apparatus for appreciating such subtlety was too crude.

 Then the donkey brayed, and a cock cried out his serratedConfiteor
through the rising mist. Where had Candle got a cock from? She must
still be roaming the province, releasing creatures from homesteads with
impunity. She was lucky she wasn't caught, as the donkey and the cock
weren't exactly keeping their whereabouts secret. The cock sounded like
a tenor.

 With all that noise, she'd be stirring by now. Still, he waited till he
saw the smoke from the kitchen chimney roll up, and he heard a window
shutter bark against the stone. He came toward the house ready to call
out, but she was standing in the doorway on one foot, the other foot
rubbing against the back of her calf. "What have you been waiting for?"
she asked, her head tilted forward. "Isn't it cold out there in the
orchard?"

 "You've been clearing the undergrowth."

 "The donkey has. Makes my life easier; he's done enough for a kitchen
garden. If we remove a few more trees, we'll have a good open space, and
fertile, by the look of it. But we'll need fencing against the donkey
and other comers. Why do you loiter, come in, you must be ice."

 He was about to sayI was afraid I'd frighten you, and then he
remembered: She possessed some sort of a talent for reading the present.
She'd probably known he was there; and indeed, she admitted as much when
asked.

 His fists clenched and opened at the notion of touching her sleep-warm
body, of wrapping his arms around her, diving his cold fingers into the
folds of her simple broadcloth sleeping tunic. But she ducked into the
shadowy doorway before he could embrace her, as if his time away had
made them strangers again.

 The place was that much straighter, simpler, more pleasant. She'd been
busy. Dried flowers set round in cracked terra-cotta pots. Tassels of
herbs drying from strings, spooling their fragrance across the kitchen.
In the fire nook, the andirons had been polished, and from the trammel
hung a fine bulbous kettle with scented water roiling in it. "How did
you know I'd be back today?"

 "The cock crowed more self-consciously, so I guessed he must have an
audience. Anyway, I sensed it would be you. Or maybe that was just hope,
who can tell the difference? You must be weary. Rest your bones, Liir,
and I'll fetch some rennety milk pudding from the cold room belowstairs."

 "Don't move about so. Just sit--here." He patted a stool near him and
smiled. Her hands flexed and met his at the fingertips, and their
fingertips bounced gently against one another. Then she took herself off
to get the pudding.

 "You'll eat first, and then you'll sleep," she said, like a mother,
"for I don't need the skills of divination to know you've been walking
most of the night."

 She would hear of nothing else. He had to content himself with watching
her flit across the kitchen, into the sunlight and out of it again. How
is it that she is like a bird, too, he thought, and felt he was on to
something, but then the food settled him, and Candle had proven right,
for his head was nodding on his spine. She helped him to the room where
they had so chastely slept, and after she had taken his shirt off and
lightly run a damp cloth under his arms and behind the lengthening mane
of hair at his nape, she dropped the cloth on the floor and pressed her
hands against his bare chest, as if trying to interpret the arcane
language of his heartbeat.

 "Later," she mouthed at him, and kissed the space where his lips would
have been if he hadn't just then begun to keel backward against the pillow.

 The sleep was devoid of character. A good sleep.

 He awoke well into the heat of the day, such as it was at this time of
year. She had set out a tunic and fresh leggings. What a capable
scavenger she was. The trousers, cut for a slenderer man, cinched too
tightly at his thighs, but they were clean, and the tunic scented of
pomander. In new garb he felt a new man, and looked out of the window to
find her.

 She was hard at work in the patch she'd mentioned. Using a sharp
segment of the printing press's broken iron wheel, she was levering
aloft a resistant root of apple tree. Smudged now, where he was
pristine, she wiped her face with the back of her hand and in vain tried
to scatter a late population of midges who found the smell of her sweat
enticing. He called to her, and she waved and fell heavily to her knees
as the root chose that moment to yield.

 "Let me do that," he said.

 "Done now. But I'll rest a spell. Come down."

 They walked to the edge of the orchard, by turns sipping sweet well
water from a single pipkin. "You've done good work here," he told her
gravely.

 "I've had good reason." With her little finger she picked at a bit of
wax in one ear. "You're back, now, and there's one on its way."

 He arched an eyebrow, feeling very Commander Cherrystone-ish.
"Company's coming?"

 "You could put it suchly."

 What was she reading out of this sunny hour that he couldn't see--oh, he
couldn't, but then he could. "It's not so. You're not old enough."

 She said, "Though like you I can't exactly say how old I am, apparently
I am old enough, Liir." Her tone was easy and a bit bored, but he
thought he knew her well enough by now to suppose that she was at least
a little frightened.

 Many of the fellows in the unit had talked about this. They'd shared
their observations. Women always knew, and a preternatural calm swept
all other earthly considerations aside when it happened. But Candle was
hardly a woman!--and not inaugurated into those mysteries. Or not by him.

 "I've been gone only a few weeks," he said, trying not to sound cold.
"Or had you already charmed a local farmer with your domingon even when
I was still recuperating inside? Is that how you got the goat, the cock,
the hen--a bartering for your farmyard needs with your farmyard skills?
Is that why you encouraged me to leave on a wild Bird chase?"

 "You needn't fuss so." She bit her lip and looked at him levelly. "It
was no other man, Liir."

 "It is not by me. Candle!" He slipped out of Qua'ati for a moment, to
spew expletives in the orchard air. "I am a fool and a naïf and a
monster, all at once, but I am not stupid about how a girl becomes
pregnant. It is not by me. Don't embarrass me with a hopeless ruse. Do
you think I would abandon you over it?"

 "I don't think--"

 "Or maybe you want me to? Well, I won't. I haven't that crooked a soul.
Just don't lie to me, for that's intolerable. Candle! The whole thing is
beyond belief."

 "Liir. I ask nothing of you. You're not married to me. You didn't
choose me. I didn't choose you."

 "You chose to save me," said Liir despondently, "when I might have
slipped away, and a good thing, too."

 "I chose to try to save someone. Someone sick in an infirmary, that is
all. I didn't know who it was. I didn't know it was you. I didn't know
you yet. I don't know you yet."

 "I amnot thefather, " he said. "Am I required to remind you how it
works? I kept my distance, Candle. I never slept with you; I never
buried myself in your trove. I thought about it, yes, but thinking's not
doing, and no child is begat by the midnight thoughts of an adult
sleeping alone."

 "But you did," she said. Her shoulders slumped. "It would be easier to
pretend you hadn't, but it doesn't matter one way or the other. The
infant grows. I won't turn it out of its nest now."

 "I didn't!" he insisted, and then she told him how he had, and when,
and why.

 A small rain came up over the orchard, and in an eddy of chill, the
drops turned to snow. The season turned several more notches in an
instant, as can happen.

 They made their way inside without further remark, and Candle put
herself to kitchen tasks. She measured two handfuls of coarse flour and
shook it through a boulter of cloth. The light greyed, and faded, and he
pulled the shutters tight, and built up the fire. There were the cock
and the hen to bring in, and the donkey to stable, and whatever else he
could think of to do, he did: shifting firewood, scattering clean straw
for the floor, arranging things on shelves. Things with handles and
spouts, items with purposes he couldn't imagine. He couldn't imagine
anything.

 They ate, and after eating she said softly, "This is a good thing, Liir."

 "Then it couldn't have come from me."

 As she prodded, and because it made a distraction if nothing else, he
told her about the Conference of the Birds and the charge under which he
was laboring--or had so labored, up until this morning upon his return--to
find his broom.

 She had always seemed unshaken by the notion of flying dragons. When he
asked why, she told him that she'd heard rumors of such creatures a few
years back. They were involved in an action in the provincial capital.

 "Qhoyre," he filled in. "It figures."

 "If there were going to be troubles, you'd expect them in Qhoyre," she
concurred. "It began as a tax revolt or something. The garrison of the
Emerald City military was stormed by Quadlings, and more or less
annihilated."

 "I don't believe you can be more or less annihilated. You either are or
you aren't." He thought of the suave, genteel Commander Cherrystone, and
hoped that he had been one of the ones who had been killed.

 "Don't look to me for accuracy. I'm a simple soul. I'm merely telling
you what I heard my uncle say. Some of the reasons we left." Candle
continued. It was calming for both of them to avoid the matter of her
pregnancy. "He said that the Emerald City flared up in reprisal.
Overreacted. A small fleet of flying dragons was unleashed against the
Quadlings at Qhoyre. It was pretty terrible. There were only a few
survivors, and who could trust what those poor traumatized loons said?
Flyingdragons ? Quadlings are so superstitious. No one knew what to
believe--so let's get out of here, said my uncle."

 She folded her hands in her lap. "So I'm not surprised that it has
turned out to have been true."

 He put his head in his hands. The other fellows in his squadron. Had
any of them survived? Ansonby, Kipper, Somes? Burny, Mibble? The one
they called Fathead? Or what about their girlfriends--were they tarred as
collaborators?

 It wasn't just the girl slung from the burning bridge--it was all of
them. Her parents, their neighbors, the countryfolk. The occupying
forces, the officers and the infantry, the support teams, the
ambassadors. The repercussions seemed endless and only to grow in force
and significance, never to recede.

 Candle saw his expression. She took his hand, and he had to work hard
not to snatch it away.

 "Remember why you went to the Conference," she said. "Before you save
anyone else, you have to save yourself, Liir. Otherwise you're just a
bundle of tics, a stringed puppet manipulated by chance and the
insensible wind."

 "I will stay here, whether you've been sleeping round the countryside
or not. We are called to be as limbs of God," he said.

 "That piety curdles on your tongue, and you know it. If you don't
rescue yourself, Liir, you might just as easily be a limb of evil."

 "One has to admit one's destiny."

 "Naming your destiny the will of the Unnamed God doesn't make it so.
And self-glorifying, besides."

 They lay down in the same bed that they had shared before. Neither of
them slept, though not this time from being racked with desire.

 2

 THEY AROSE WHEN ITwas still dark, besting the cock at his own business.

 Tea in a cup with a crack in the glaze; small beads of tea lined up
vertically. He stared at it, wishing to learn a new language.

 "Whom will you choose to save?" said Candle, when the sun made an
effort to lighten the room. "I am not that girl, you know. That Quadling
girl you saw pitched into the burning river. You cannot make me her by
beggaring yourself for my needs. You can't choose me in that girl's place."

 "Maybe I can't save anyone," he said. "Since Elphaba died, how many
times have I set out to try? There was Nor, who was in prison. There was
Princess Nastoya, in medical extremis. I make no headway in either
direction. Even some miserable boy I saw on a road, whose granny was
willing to sell him in exchange for my broom--I just walked on by. Why
should I be beholden to those Birds? Find the old broom! Speak out
danger to the world! I'm not a spokesperson for myself; how could I be
for them?"

 "You can do what you choose to do. You're hardly on death's door," she
reminded him. "I mean, not anymore."

 "And you'd have me believe that I have lost my virginity, and I don't
even remember it. Life in a coma. Well, it figures. It's consistent,
isn't it? I'll give you credit for that: you've read me correctly."

 "You owe me nothing." Candle stood up and put her hands on the small of
her back. "There is enough food and firewood here to see me through my
months. It'll be spring before the baby comes. The goat will provide
backup milk if I run dry. Or I'll take myself back to the mauntery for
the final lying-in. The maunts will know what to do. It's not the first
time the maunts have seen such."

 "If I oweyou nothing," he said, "no one owesanyone a thing."

 "Maybe no one does."

 "Except the Unnamed God."

 "Maybe we don't owe the Unnamed God anything," she said. "Maybe not
allegiance, maybe not gratitude, maybe not praise, maybe not attention.
Maybe the Unnamed God owes us."

 He sputtered at her impiety, but she looked queasy: a touch of morning
sickness upon her, no doubt. She hurried away to take care of it in
private. The yard outside the house was rimy with hoarfrost, and the new
sun shone upon it harshly. He had to squint to watch her cast herself
away from him.

 She was shivering. As the winter came in, she'd have to go more slowly
to the outhouse, what with ice on the ground, and a weight in her belly.
He would try to tie some straw to a pole, leave her a makeshift broom to
sweep away the snow, if nothing else.

 He gathered the straw and threw it on the floor while he hunted for
cord with which to bind it. In the splayed angles in which it fell, it
spelled the burning letter again, a letter he couldn't read.

_ Dragonfings_

 1

 WAS IT THAThe was better traveled now--or just that he was older? Had
the Emerald City actually changed, or just his ability to apprehend it?

 The Big Itself had never seemed shy of self-regard--Liir remembered that
much. Now he became aware of how everything flourished on a hefty scale.
Architectural metastasis. The chapels were like churches, the churches
like basilicas. The government houses out-bloated the basilicas, with
bigger columns, more imposing flights of steps, higher spires. Private
homes were nothing shy of palaces-in-training.

 In his absence, the Emerald City had undergone a makeover. Oceans of
whitewash had been splashed to obliterate the grattifi. Along the
canals, trees had been pollarded to force full head, and ringed with
liquid lime to prevent disease. The strip he'd called Dirt Boulevard had
been replanted and it served again as a promenade, with well-raked
tracks for military drill, and meandering paths among bushes and
fountains where the plutocrats might see and be seen.

 He supposed it came down to this: The Emerald City was no longer the
capital of Oz. Itwas Oz. It survived for the sole purpose of insuring
its own survival.

 Maybe it always had done so, but now there was no pretending otherwise.
Were there always so many ministries, or were they simply better marked?
The Ministry of Comfort--that was aid for the indigent. The Ministry of
the Home Guard. The Ministry of Sincerity (the sign beneath readFORMERLY
THE PRESS BUREAU ).

 The Ministry of Artistic License. Apparently now you had to apply to be
an artist.

 Obelisks, cenotaphs, marble statues, fluttering banners and pennants.
Souvenirs in kiosks: Everything OZ. I love OZ! A keychain, a whistle, a
reticule, a letter opener, a lorgnette case: OZ, OZ. A military band
every half mile, performing gratis for the residents of the emerald
hive. The City seemed to have its own theme song.

 But for what, wondered Liir. For background? For show? Everyone seemed
in a hurry, more so than he'd remembered. The cafés were thriving, the
public trams dripping with riders, the piazzas clotted with tourists,
the museums thronged. "Apostle Muscle," an exhibit showing at the Lord
Chuffrey Exposition Hall, was advertised in broadsheets plastered on all
the public notice boards. The graphic was brilliant, Liir thought: a
male foot in an open, leather-strapped sandal stepping out of a cloud.
The painted landscape receding to the horizon showed that wherever the
Apostle had already set his foot, communities like miniature Emerald
Cities sprung up within the precise outline of his footly influence,
from the heel to the sprawl of toes.

 Liir turned his back on Southstairs, but it wasn't all that hard to do.
The Emerald City had grown taller, more prosperous. Southstairs was more
hidden now, though some edict or other must be keeping the land around
the Palace relatively low built, so its stately domes and minarets could
still dominate the City center.

 2

 AS FOR THEcitizens of the Emerald City, business seemed to be profiting
them very well. Skirts were thicker, hems were longer, fur trimmed
everything, from ladies' hats to brougham bedeckings. Men's waistcoats
were cut fuller to accommodate bigger bellies. The dry goods used by
clothiers looked overdyed: the colors richly saturated, as if intended
to be seen from a distance, as on a stage. The effects would have been
comic but for a costive sobriety that seemed to have swept the City like
an infection.

 It'd be comfortable to be here, Liir decided. Everywhere else, ordinary
folks laugh so much because they're nervous. Being stationed in Qhoyre,
we laughed like morons: it helped us deal. It also made us friends. But
perhaps you don't need to laugh if all your deprivations have been
alleviated, your anxieties relieved. You can afford to be judicious,
keep a civil tongue in your head, and speak in a lower tone of voice.

 There were riffraff, as before--and a good thing, too, or he'd have
stuck out even more than he did. Not so many Animals, still. A few in
the service industry. An aproned old Warthog Governess, pushing a pram,
some Rhino security guards.

 And kids. Kids looking terribly old. Probably alley-cat thieves among
the younger of them. Older kids, sloe-eyed teenagers, who cast him sly
looks, trying to make out if he was an easy mark, competition for trade,
or a possible ally.

 Ruddy Quadlings in their huddles of family, clam-colored Yunamata
indigents surviving on handouts and ale. Dwarves looking uppity, and why
not?--dwarves looking shifty, and so what. Munchkins, in sizes small,
medium, or grande, who'd emigrated from their own Free State. Or maybe
they were turfed out for passing secrets or engaging in black trade.
Dirty-looking polybloods in tatters of blanket, stepping on hardened
bare feet across raked gravel forecourts, holding out their hands until
some welcoming committee came out with a cudgel.

 Elphaba had come to the Emerald City once, as a young woman. Maybe even
his age--he didn't know. She'd never said much about it. "Pimps and Prime
Ministers, and you can't tell the difference," she'd growled once. Had
she stuck out like a green thumb? Or were people more accepting back
then? For better or worse, he was able to pass.

 He guessed by the end of the day he might be imprisoned in Southstairs
himself. He thought he was ready for it, and perhaps he deserved nothing
better. Still, if that were so, why was he taking care not to stand out?
Skulking where he needed to skulk, striding confidently when the
streetscape required it? A deeper intention at work, he guessed: that
old beast-in-the-bear-trap thing that humans did so well? Even the
reprobate who knows he's a moral coward wants to keep drawing breath.

 Despite the building boom that the new prosperity allowed, the Emerald
City remained familiar. Liir found his way more or less correctly to the
Arch of the Wizard and along the Ozma Embankment, through the tony
district of Goldhaven right to Mennipin Square, at the far end of which
the house of Lord Chuffrey presided.

 He wasn't exactly sure what he could accomplish, but he had to start
somewhere. The Lady Glinda, née Upland, now Chuffrey, was his only
contact in the Emerald City. Even retired from public life, surely a
former throne minister would have access to the army, yes? To its
barracks, its dragon stables, the lot. Could she be convinced to come to
his aid again, after a whole decade?

 Mennipin Square hadn't suffered any loss of prestige in the years since
he'd been here. The house fronts were decorated with swags of green and
gold. Lurlinemas was coming, of course. Ceremonial greens and garlands
of winter golds were woven through the uprights of the iron fence that
surrounded the square's private gardens.

 In order to get to the kitchen yard where he had once presented
himself, he had to pass the mansion's front entrance and turn a corner.
When he reached the approach to the front door, he paused. Beyond the
gravel of the carriage drive rose a flight of granite steps. At the
landing, in front of the carved double doors, stretched a huge tiger in
the act of licking its balls. A chain around its neck locked the tiger
to one of the marble pillars supporting the portico, but there appeared
enough length in the chain to allow the beast room to stretch and lunge.
Sensibly Liir kept his distance. He looked, though. He'd never seen a
wild animal chained in such an upper-purse locale.

 The creature paused an instant and shifted its eyes without lifting its
head, looking out from beneath tiger brows. "What are you looking at?"
he growled softly.

 A Tiger. A talking Animal, tied up like a farm dog, to scare off intruders.

 Liir wanted to rush on, but to ignore the Tiger's belligerent question
was to suggest a condescension he didn't feel. And Elphaba would have
taken it all in stride. "I'm looking at a whole lot of Tiger," he said
at last.

 "That's the right answer," purred the Tiger. "You're either smart or
lucky."

 "I'm just brave," said Liir. "Have to be. I'm coming to see Lady Glinda."

 "Well, you'renot lucky, then," the Animal answered, "because she's not
at home."

 Liir's shoulders fell.

 "She's off at Mockbeggar Hall. The Chuffrey country estate, down
Kellswater way. A month in mourning."

 "Mourning?"

 "You just rolled off the cabbage cart? Looks like it. Her husband died.
Didn't you know? Lord Chuffrey. He made a big donation to the Emperor
and the banker's cheque had hardly cleared the First Accountant's office
when Lord Chuffrey breathed his rummy last. Perhaps he thought he'd
never be in as expensive a state of grace again, and might as well take
advantage of it. Lady Glinda's bereaved."

 "I'm sorry for her," said Liir.

 "Don't be. She's not exactly a pauper widow. And she wasn't much more
than a paper wife to him, anyway, so I hardly think she's fussed. She'll
miss him, no doubt--we all will. He was a good sort in his way. Supports
my family upcountry. Or he did."

 Liir slumped against the stone gatepost. "Great. So what next?"

 "I wouldn't come too close if I were you," said the Tiger. "I may be
chatty when I'm bored, but if I chat too much I might work up an
appetite." He winked at Liir, who moved back a few feet.

 "Why do you stay?"

 "Well, it certainly isn't the chains, is it? I sport these for effect,"
said the Tiger. He tossed his head and his eyes flashed in anger. "I
mean, it's a statement of style, isn't it? Or are youreally only a
cabbagehead?" He was on his feet, and he roared. The gate shook on its
pins, and Liir was halfway through Mennipin Square before he realized he
was running.

 So much for his first idea. Well, he'd have to work without the help
and blessing of Lady Glinda, Society Goddess. And he'd hoped for a
square meal to set himself up for harder campaigns. He had only the
small scraps of dried fruit and bread that Candle had forced into his
hands before he left.

 The last time Liir had been so destitute in the Emerald City, he had
gone to work in the Home Guard. Ready to improvise, he headed again to
the main barracks campus near Munchkin Mousehole, in the lee of the low
hill on which the Palace in its opulence squatted.

 Boys, and a few girls, too, were running about the same sward on which
he had once played gooseball with the bored soldiers. The grass was
brown and flattened, weary of winter even before Lurlinemas Day, but the
cries that rang out among the children seemed green enough to him.
Unless he should run forward and capture the ball, and impress himself
onto a team by dint of his swift responses, he would remain invisible to
the children. Why not? He was a tallish, slightly ravaged young man,
thinner, more ribby than the sleek soldiers who toyed with the kids.

 He saw himself through their eyes: his cord-held hair, his green eyes,
his new habit of ducking his head, scratching his elbows. A handsome
enough beggar, maybe, but a beggar nonetheless, and too grown up to be
thrown a bread roll for charity's sake. If the notion of charity still
obtained here. He wasn't yet able to tell if it did.

 Still, children at their games! It pleased him to watch. He remembered
the children he had sung to, briefly, on the steps of a church when he
first came to the Emerald City. He had smiled at them, had felt for them
in a general sense, but he hadn't stood solid with them. Each time of
life is such a prison, a portable prison. The children here on this
fairway, the soldiers messing about with them, were no more like Liir
than a Tiger was, or an elf or a--

 "Cutting an old chum with impunity, and not blinking an eye. You've
considerable nerve, you have."

 Liir shook his head to register. A soldier at his left shoulder,
breathing hard; he must have been among the fellows playing at
gooseball, and come running up behind him. Hah. So much for the more
sublime perception of the isolate.

 "You don't remember my name any more than I yours." The fellow swept
his damp blond hair off his sweaty brow. "What'd you do to deserve early
retirement?Our tenures have been indefinitely extended with no right to
petition otherwise."

 Liir shook his head, wondering if he should play dumb, play it as a
case of mistaken identity. Play wounded in battle? Play for time anyway.
He hadn't worked out any particulars of strategy, just intentions.

 "It's bon Cavalish, if you please. Trism, actually. You came into the
service from this very field, and I was the one told you how."

 Liir wrinkled a smile at him and shrugged. Work with what you
have.Trism . Yes. A Minor Menacier... d in dragon husbandry, if he
remembered correctly.

 Coolly, Liir said, "That's a good eye you have for a distant
acquaintance. I was standing there thinking how blind we all are to each
other, and I didn't even recognize you."

 "And I got you, but not your name."

 "Ko, that's what I go by. Liir, commonly."

 "Liir Ko. Right. You went off somewhere a few years back."

 "I did indeed," said Liir, "but I don't want to talk about it,
certainly not here."

 "O ho," said Trism, and then, "Oho . A deserter? No."

 "You'll get in trouble being seen with me."

 "Trouble. That'd be fun." Trism looked this way and that. "Well, unless
you're reenlisting voluntarily, you're making a big mistake showing
yourself here. Or do youwant to be caught? Are you spying for one of our
enemies?"

 "I don't even know who our enemies are," said Liir. "I never have."

 "Well, if you've really gone and scampered, you count as one of them,
so you better make yourself scarce. However, don't drift too far. The
service is a bit more lenient in some matters than it used to be. They
had to relax a few rules if they were going to keep us enlisted forever.
We get a little city freedom, if you know what I mean. I'm sprung
tonight till midnight. Hang about somewhere and we'll have a drink.
Don't forget. Don't forget me." He gripped Liir's collar suddenly. "I
haven't forgotten you."

 3

 TRISM WAS AS GOOD AS HIS WORDand was waiting at a sidewalk place in
Burntpork, the low-rent district. "Welcome to the Cherry and Cucumber,"
he said, handing up a full pint of lager before Liir'd had a chance to
take a stool. "They keep their license to serve real beer because they
sponsor the annual Holy Action Day festivities."

 "The what?"

 "You'reway out of touch. We can change that. Cheers."

 The place was too empty at this hour for Liir to bring up the matter
most pressing to him. Voices would carry. Scrawled in chalk on a slate
above the bartender's station, though, was a message announcing:
"Tonight, Fourth Comeback Tour, Sillipede Herself. 9:30. No tomatoes."
The notice didn't actually promise a crowd, but Liir could hope. Or they
could wander elsewhere.

 Liir wasn't inclined to talk about himself much, and found that easy
enough to manage. Trism didn't ask. He relaxed almost at once, and
chattered at length about the military as if he and Liir had been best
of friends back then. This one, that one, regulations by the book, funny
pranks on supercilious superiors. "And what's become of Commander
Cherrystone?" asked Liir as lightly as he could. He didn't want to be
recognized as a deserter by someone with the power to slap him in chains
for it.

 "Dunno." Trism turned to survey the room, which, as hoped, was filling
up with a noisier clientele, some of whom had been drinking before they
arrived.

 "We're not likely to meet a commanding officer here," said Liir, "I
suppose."

 "Anything's possible. Tastes vary. Doubt it, though."

 On their third round, Liir began. "You were special forces, weren't
you? Back then?"

 "To the Unnamed God, we're all special," said Trism. Liir was unsure if
he heard sarcasm in the rejoinder. "Minor Menacier back then."

 "Husbandry, wasn't it?"

 "Oh, the lad's sharper than he looks. Yeah, husbandry, for a time."

 "Not now?"

 "I don't like to talk about my work when I'm out larking."

 "But I'm curious. Sounded very important. We dug the foundations for
that new building--the stables."

 "Basilica."

 "That's right. I remember now. No stables below?"

 "Look, it's Sillipede. The very one. A living legend. She must be
ninety." An extremely odd, angular creature was being hoisted onto a
small stage. Behind her, whisking spittle from the mouthpiece of her
willow flute, stood a young woman dressed in little more than golden
epaulets slapped strategically about her body. A couple of Bears opened
their music cases and began to turn pegs to tune up: an Ugabumish
guitar, a violinsolo. "So few Animals with real jobs, but if you drummed
Animals entirely out of the music business, nobody'd hear a note."

 Sillipede began to warble. She was so old that it was impossible to
tell if she was a man or a woman, nor if she was trying to make an
attempt to imitate either her own or the opposite gender. In the cracked
and breathy voice, though, the singer still had considerable power, and
the room quietened down somewhat. Liir had to wait for the first number
to end before continuing his remarks.

 "I mean, specifically, dragons," he said through the applause.

 "Hush, you're not being polite," said Trism. "Isn't she something?"

 "Something or something else or something else again. Maybe not to my
taste. Do we have to stay?"

 "And give up our good seats? Have one more beer and let's see the first
set through, anyway."

 Sillipede bumbled her way through some difficult patches, talking more
than she sang. She lit a cigarette halfway through one number and burnt
her fingers, and told her backup to can it. "I'm hardly myself tonight,"
she told the crowd, "what with this dreadful heathen holiday
approaching.Lurlinemas . Can you believe the Emperor in his goodness
allows any reminder of those archaic superstitions? Can you believe that
he in his goodness? Can you believe his goodness? I mean, can you? I'm
asking you a question here."

 The room was silent. Was she spinning out a comic story or was she
losing her marbles? She took a drag on her smoke.

 "Don't get me wrong," she said. "I can see on the faces of those of you
who stillhave faces that you're afraid you've wandered into a
conventicle of traitors instead of a comeback concert. Please. Relax. If
we get raided and we all end up in Southstairs, I'll lead singalongs on
the weekends. I will. That's a promise."

 The flautist relieved an itch beneath one of the epaulets.

 "I'm not proselytizing. Neitherfor the Unnamed God noragainst its holy
un-name. That would be plain old sedition, and frankly at my age, I'm
just not up to it." She made a face. "Sedition is unthinkable. Although
to say something is ‘unthinkable' is, of course, to have been able to
think of it. And I'm at the age where I'm losing language faster than
I'm gaining it. I don't know what sedition means anymore. I never said
it. I never never said the wordscrewy, did I? Did I say the
wordcomplicity ?"

 Someone in the back muttered something a little ugly. Sillipede said,
"I can see you back there squirming. You and your sour puss. Don't get
out much, do we? You remind me of someone. You remind me of someone that
I would find really annoying. What're you getting so feisty about? I'm
just taking a cigarette break. Shooting the breeze. If you think I'm
being unscrupulous, give me a break: I'm too old to have scruples
anymore. Where would I put them?"

 "What is she on about?" muttered Liir.

 "She's going to end up either in prison or the ward for the incurably
old," said Trism. He was red in the face. "Maybe you're right; we better
go."

 But they couldn't get up while she was in her monologue: that would
single them out for her catcalling, draw attention their way. She'd be
all over them.

 She wandered a bit in the crowd. Now she looked more like an old man in
makeup, now like an old woman trying to look young. She looked more
human than anything else, though that didn't necessarily mean handsome.
Liir prayed she wouldn't come over and start talking to him. He had a
strong feeling she would.

 Under the table, Trism reached for his hand and squeezed it. He was
more nervous than Liir. This place wasn't sanctioned by the Home Guard,
Liir guessed, and Trism would be in serious jeopardy if things got any
hotter. Liir detached his hand.

 "I'm a ditsy old relic, don't mind me," said Sillipede. "You young
things take everything so seriously. But you don't remember the bad old
days of the Wizard. The drought. How we lived back then. How we laughed!
Hah. A lark. And hardly anyone stood up to him. Only some fool witch
from the hinterlands. And we all know what happens to witches."

 Someone hissed.

 "These days are so much better," the creature said. "Ask Sillipede.
Sillipede knows. I'm old enough to remember when the Ozma Regent was
still the crowned head of the nation, and baby Ozma a little bundle of
coos and poos. I'm so old I was already retired when the Wizard arrived
and set things to rights. Hard times then! Things are better now, ain't
they? Well, depends on your outlook, I guess. If things ain't actually
better, they sure aregooder .

 "These times," she continued, "so righteous! Everyone so much more
moral! Put some clothes on your nakedness, girl, or the vice squad'll be
down our throats. Or down your throat, anyway, if you look at ‘em like
that."

 The flutist looked as nonplussed as the audience.

 "You got to hold on to your values, if you can still reach them," said
the chanteuse. "Buy some values, rent ‘em, steal 'em if you have to.
Sell ‘em for a profit when tastes change. Whatever works. Is this a
crock, or what?"

 She regained the small stage and put her hand to her eyes, shading the
flare of the lights. "I can see you. I know you're there," she said. "I
know you're in there somewhere. I can wait." She signaled the Bear on
bass and said, "A torch song about lost hopes, Skoochums, how ‘bout. For
old time's sakes. In the key of E, Harrikin. No, not B. I said E--E for
Elphaba. One. Two. Three. Whatever."

 The Bear lazily thwacked out a bass run, and Sillipede drew a breath,
but then spoke again, interrupting the intro. "And that other problem,
all that graffiti! I saw it again on my way here, scrawled on some
library wall. ‘Elphaba lives!' What's that supposed to mean? I ask you.
Isn't it just too much? Why don't they keep their sloppy old slogans to
themselves? Elphaba lives! As if."

 She flicked her cigarette butt into someone's lager. "Now I just feel
all riled up and alive. This ain't happened since I left double digits.
So I am going to sing a beautiful old hymn to prove it to you. Anyone
who's with the Emperor can stand and sing it with me, to show we're not
just scratching our balls here, are we, folks?"

 The band patched together an intro and Sillipede sauntered into a
familiar melody. The patrons of the place were irritated, a bit unnerved
by the theatrics, and unsure who was being made fools of: the Emperor,
the Unnamed God, Sillipede herself, or them--or anyone idiotic enough to
take a position against the Palace. But the song was balm
itself--devotional, a bit flowery, familiar. Complexities gave way to the
simpler sentiments. People stood and sang in defiance of Sillipede's
posturing. In the shadows and shuffling, Liir and Trism escaped. Trism
grabbed Liir's hand as if he might try to duck away; Liir couldn't help
squeezing back. He was wound up.E for Elphaba . It was as if, these
years later, he'd finally attended her wake.

 4

 THEY WALKED ALONGa quay in the Lower Quarter. Elsewhere in Oz it was
probably snowing, but with the warm smoke of ten thousand coal fires,
Liir and Trism felt only a particulate moisture in the air, part rain,
part mist. Flames burning in lampposts gave off a pulsing, melon-colored
glow.

 "Mustn't be late, I assume," said Liir.

 "One can hear the bells of the basilica all over the City. These days
of the New Piety, they ring on the half hour. We've some time yet."

 "That place made you tense. Where're we going?"

 "I've been there before, but not on Treason Night."

 "You think that was treasonous?" Liir was aghast. "I thought it"--he
governed his language--"only stupid."

 "She'd do better to keep her opinions to herself. Or organize them
first, anyway. I wasn't even sure what she was on about, but it takes
something like whiskey courage to pretend that much skepticism about the
Apostle Emperor. He's a good fellow. The people love him. I myself feel
flattered to have met him personally."

 "You have? Really? What's he like?"

 Trism shot him a look. "Of course I have. I was with you the first time
it happened. The night before you lot shipped out? Remember? He offered
us his carriage. He was cynical and louche then, as I remember. A lost
soul. His Awakening hadn't happened."

 "The Emperor of Oz... . Shell? Shell Go-to-hell Thropp?"

 "The First Spear himself. Can you really not have known? Wherehave you
been? The moon?"

 The very paving stones on the quay seemed more slippery. "I don't get
it. Everyone talks about the Emperor's... s virtue. Shell was the last
person to have any virtue. He was a spy, wasn't he--didn't someone say?
Anyway, he used extract of poppyflower to opiate the young women in
Southstairs and fuck them silly. I know that for a fact."

 "Well, who better to speak for the Unnamed God, then, than one who has
sinned so egregiously? Talk about your recoveries... e Awakening
happened, and he heard the voice of the Unnamed God, telling him to
lead. You know his sisters were the two witches? Nessarose and Elphaba
Thropp?"

 Liir felt ill. "It's just too... canny. Too unlikely."

 "Not as unlikely as all that. Who is exempt from the claw of salvation?
The more sinful you are, the more likely salvation can take root. His
father was a unionist minister, after all. A missionary, I think."

 "He's a charlatan, Shell is."

 "May have been once. Don't think so now. He believes he was Awakened in
order to lead Oz through this desperate time."

 "Are we so desperate that we need the likes of him--"

 "Well, you tell me," said Trism. His voice had gone lower, intimate. He
leaned in and almost put his chin on Liir's shoulder. "How desperate are
any of us at any given moment? Hmmm? Are any of us so desperate that we
might, say, attack an unarmed rural settlement at night and burn it into
the river?"

 Liir pivoted to glare at Trism, who reached out and pinned Liir's right
arm behind his back, whispering, "You shitty little creep."

 "Let me go. What is this? A one-person tribunal? A vendetta? Let me go.
Where are we?" In the mist Liir had lost his bearings. "How do you know
anything about me? And what's it to you? I was doing the Emperor'swork,
Trism. Your precious leader. His bidding. Let me go."

 "I'm going to beat your head in and then shove your sorry carcass into
the water." By now Trism had both of Liir's hands behind his back, and
Trism was kicking at cobbles randomly, to find one that was loose and
use it for braining.

 Liir struggled. Trism, in military trim, was fitter and had had the
advantage of surprise. To yell wouldn't help: a police force would side
with Trism at once. "Look," Liir said, trying not to sound terrified.
"I'm bone tired. What do you care about what happened south of Qhoyre?
Aren't you a company man? Head office mastered that situation in a
flash, I've heard."

 "I heard whatyou did. How could I not? Soldiers gossip worse than
housewives. Because of that attack, the Quadlings around Qhoyre struck
out at Cherrystone's garrison. You lost some of your buddies, buddy. And
then the Emperor called up his brand-new defensive system and deployed
it against the natives."

 Liir began to get it. "Oh ho. But that was your specialty. Those were
your dragons."

 "I was one of the team. Prime Menacier of the division. Right. And I'd
been told the dragons were to be held in abeyance, paraded for show on
Holy Action Day. The annual display of military might and moral purpose.
Scare the rabble and comfort the nervous. Nothing like good defenses to
allow citizens to sleep well at night."

 "And you believed every word of what was told you, and never meant to
hurt a fly. I know that story. Let me go, Trism. Come on. You're hurting
me."

 "I've only started to hurt you. Get used to it. Because of your fucking
about, the dragons were called up from their catacombs. And you haven't
seen merciless until you've seen those beasts at work."

 Liir was near to spitting. "I have seen merciless, Trism. As it
happens. I was attacked by your little trained pets."

 It was Trism's turn to start, and with the advantage, Liir tried to
pull away. He half managed, but they ended up in a tumble on the
pavement, fighting. They rolled in puddles and a plod of horse dung, and
Trism ended up on top, his knees on Liir's chest.

 "I'm going to kill you. I saw you standing there on the playground, and
I thought: thereis an Unnamed God, and it has delivered you to me to
kill. Your cruel actions have sentenced me to a life more wretched than
anything you have known. Once the military strategists saw what the
dragons could do, nothing for it but that they should be used again.
Trained more precisely. My life ischained to the job of perfecting the
killing capacity of those creatures." He was as close to wailing as
yelling, and Liir saw now what he hadn't noticed so far: Trism bon
Cavalish was a shattered person.

 "Kill me then," Liir said. "It'll make you feel a whole lot better, I
can just tell. And maybe me, too, the way things are going. But hear me
out first. It was the Emperor's word that started this whole thing. He
required Cherrystone to invent an incident. Maybe he wanted a reason to
launch a dragony attack all along, I don't know. I was doing the bidding
of my company commander."

 "And that's all I'm doing, and between us there's hundreds and hundreds
dead, and more hundreds living in terror, and even more hundreds ready
to kill us back, if they could only find a way."

 Liir let Trism sob. Well, he didn't have much choice. Trism's nose
dripped on Liir's face, but Liir couldn't lift his arms to wipe it off.
"We're more or less in the same boat, you know," Liir said in as even a
voice as the sentiment allowed, when Trism had regained some composure.
"We've both done some serious damage."

 Trism took a huge breath, nodded, and then removed his knees from
Liir's chest. Liir sat up and, as discreetly as he could, shook the snot
off his forehead.

 5

 THEY WALKED ACROSSthe Law Courts Bridge and disappeared into the alleys
and courtyards of the Lower Quarter. The place teemed with charlatans,
addicts, and runaways; it stunk of sizzling night sausage and sewage,
and rang with the laughter of the mad. We belong nowhere else, thought
Liir; better get accustomed to it.

 They could talk, though, without fear of being overheard; and in not
looking at each other they could say more.

 Trism bon Cavalish was the chief dragon master. He wasn't governor of
the dragon stables, but he trained the creatures with a sure hand and a
regulating eye. He had the longest tenure on the staff. His work
required him to follow the exploits of the dragons and fine-tune their
training.

 He knew that a pack of dragons from the west had returned with a broom
and a cape, though he didn't know where this bounty had come from. Liir,
of all places! Trism knew about the scrapings of the missionary maunts,
among, it turned out, several dozen others.

 "Scrapings," said Liir with a shudder. Candle had mentioned such a
thing. "I hardly know what it means... 
 The claws are sharp as razors, oppositional pinchers like a human thumb
and forefinger, Trism explained. A human can build a miniature ship in
an empty jeroboam, and a dragon can remove a face with as few as nine
incisions.

 Trism was curt. "Don't ask me for the rationale. I know one thing: the
dragons only go after the young. They're trained that way." He squared
his shoulders. "Itrained them that way. The theory is that when the
young are brought down in their prime, it is more--alarming--useful--than
if some old codger or crone is bumped off."

 Why hadn't the dragons scraped Liir's face? He was young enough. Maybe
they thought the broom and cape were all the trove they needed. Or maybe
they saw something in Liir that stopped them.

 "But maunts!" Liir said. "Young women devoting their lives to the
service of the Unnamed God? It doesn't figure."

 Trism explained that the old maunteries, with their traditions of
independence, didn't suit the leadership style of the Emperor. The
Apostle of the Unnamed God--

 "What's all this about the Apostle?"

 "That's what the Emperor calls himself. The humblest of the humble has
been exalted by the Unnamed God. So the Apostle feels obliged to
exercise the authority granted him." It seemed that some of the
maunteries about Oz were led by older women raised in an archaic
scholastic tradition. Some superiors were becoming dangerously out of
touch with the needs of the common folk, and fell to asking bothersome
questions about the spiritual authority of the Emperor. Such foment
could only erode the confidence of the nation.

 "Is that it?" asked Liir. "Is this a moment of foment?"

 "I'm not privy to the thinking. Information's meted out on a
need-to-know basis. But I've heard the western tribes were close to
uniting by treaty, to defend against City interests in their land. The
dragon attacks could confound the tribes, cause them to mistrust one
another, if they didn't know who was behind the attacks.

 "The faces of those young missionaries you mention," Trism concluded,
working to maintain his composure. "They've been cured and stored.
They're going to be taken out at the next Holy Affairs Day and
exhibited. A point is going to be made."

 There was worse still. The dragons--there were several dozen of
them--were fed on the corpses of freshly killed humans. That bloody diet
helped stoke the dragons with the strength needed to fly the hundreds of
miles to the west. The cadavers were imported directly from a killing
chamber in Southstairs, where a fresh supply was always available,
thanks to the culling campaigns of the Under-mayor.

 "Chyde," intoned Liir. "The guy with the rings."

 Trism was nonplussed. "Is Shell the spy, or is it you?"

 "I get around. Find the company I deserve. Go on."

 "Well, with all that folderdoodle, human corpses freshly bled and
rendered into cutlets, do you wonder I am a wreck? The dragons weren't
my idea, but I was elevated to the position, and now they're under my
supervision."

 "Whose idea were they? Shell's not that clever."

 Trism cast Liir a dark look. "Who can believe anyone anymore? But I met
Shell again--as Emperor I mean, of course--a while ago. I had a private
audience, not long after his Elevation to the Imperialcy."

 Liir folded his arms and leaned against a parapet. They'd walked on,
climbing out of the Lower Quarter as the streets climbed. The lights of
the alleys of the Burntpork district burned below the escarpment. "Do tell."

 "He was humility personified, Liir. Make that face if you like. You
distrust everything. He's a little thicker about the waist, very quick
of wit and... most tender, I guess. His Awakening has given him a
largesse and a zeal. He talked about it. Why shouldn't he lead?
‘Choosing the lowliest among us,' he said, indicating himself. ‘A
fornicator and a sot.' He seemed pretty shocked. ‘What am I but a
shell--waiting to be filled with the spirit of the Unnamed God?'"

 "What form did his Awakening take, I wonder? I thought people who heard
voices were generally considered lunatics."

 "Who knows. He grew up in the thick of it, though, didn't he? He'd had
those two powerful sisters; next to them he must always have felt like
shredded cabbage."

 "Are we talking about the same Shell? Come on!"

 "Come on yourself. Suppose everyone in your family was thought to be
wicked. Even were calledWicked, almost as a title--"

 But they were, thought Liir; it was my family, too, or as good as.

 "--what would you have done in Shell's place--as... leviation?
Compensation? Damage control? Shoot, he may have believed the next
flying house or flying bucket of water was meant for him. You'd sign on
with a Higher Authority if you were he, wouldn't you?"

 "Shell was about the last one I'd have fingered for a low self-image.
Surprise, surprise. Now he works out his inferiority at the helm of the
nation... 
 "He sees it as destiny. He showed me a page torn out of a book of
magic. The Scarecrow found it in the Wizardic apartments after the
abdication. It was in an indecipherable script, but it had been
laboriously translated. I suppose by the Wizard. ‘On the Administration
of Dragons' it said."

 Liir felt creepy. He knew that the Wizard had wanted Elphaba's
Grimmerie. She had sworn it would never happen. This sounded like a bit
of it. How had it gotten here?

 "He convinced me it was the right thing to do," continued Trism. "I
believed him, mostly because he believes himself. He's not lying; he's
not the sham that the Wizard was, or misguided like Glinda the
Glamorous, establishing libraries wherever she planted her jeweled
scepter. Neither was he the ineffectual front man of a cabal of bankers,
like the Scarecrow. He's the genuine article."

 "The genuine article of what?" It was Liir's turn to scorn. "He
convinced you to take part in something so heinous?"

 "He asked me. What could I say? It was like the Unnamed God came down--"

 "Isn't the Unnamed God actually unnamed so that you can't confuse it
with someone named Shell Thropp?"

 "I'm just telling you, since you asked. We've all heard that the
bankers in Shiz have been withdrawing investments from the Free State of
Munchkinland. Lord Chuffrey was the chief architect of that strategy.
Sanctions against the Munchkins. They're not small enough already, bring
them to their little knees. The exercise of dragon power was billed as a
necessary lead-up to an annexation of Restwater in western Munchkinland.
Well, the Emerald City needs the water, you know."

 "All that bores me. You still knew what you were training dragons to do."

 "I did," said Trism. "The dragons were the Second Spear."

 If the Seventh Spear could immolate Bengda, what might the Second Spear
be capable of? And the Emperor, the First Spear? "Can't you ask for a
reassignment?"

 "Dragonmaster bon Cavalish? Reassigned? Don't be absurd. They couldn't
replace me. I'm too valuable. My assistants are assigned to the stables
on a quick rotation so they can't learn too much. There's no replacement
trained to take my place. Not yet anyway, it's all too new. In the
development and testing stages."

 "You could just leave. Scamper, as you put it. The way I did."

 "That would make me feel better for about an hour. It would do no good
beyond that. The dragons would still be there. Someone else would figure
out how to hum them through their assignments. I'm talented, but I'm not
a freak; I'm not indispensable. Besides, I have a family. They'd be
fatally mortified if I disappeared in disgrace--and singled out for
reprisals, like as not."

 "A family." Liir whispered the word as if it meantgelignite . He felt
cold, as if he was offended that his potential murderer no longer
thought him worth the effort to kill. Falling from a great height again,
and no warning. Afamily .

 "What'sthat look for? I mean parents. Citizens of some standing. From
good lines. Also a lunk of an older brother, simple in the head. Not
such a good iteration of the bloodlines."

 And Liir didn't crash-land but was rescued by that answer.

 They were walking, circling, in the mist. It was a clammy night to be
out on the street, but neither of them wanted to stop in another
establishment. The mist thickened to a fog, and bells rang out.
Ten-thirty. Someone emptied a chamber pot out an upper window, and the
soldiers ducked together into a doorway just in time to escape being
wasted. It put Liir in mind of the time they met, huddled in an archway,
sheltered from a hailstorm.

 For the first time since Quadling Country, Liir felt the appetite for a
perguenay cigarette.

 They kept on. Dragons. Where had they come from, these creatures of
myth and mystery? Had a cluster of eggs been uncovered in some landslide
in the Scalps, or in a mud-pocket in the badlands of Quadling Country?
Trism wasn't certain.

 Liir didn't have to ask about the more basicwhy . Not if the Emperor's
aim was to make rural people cower. If a dragon was really a flying
lizard, the original lizard of Oz was the Time Dragon. The foundation
myth of the nation. In a subterranean cavern, deeper even than
Southstairs, sealed over by earthquakes and landslides, the Time Dragon
slept. He was dreaming the history of the whole world, instant by instant.

 Trism was thinking along the same road. "I can tell you the
inspiration," he said, and--a little pompously--recited the words of the
anonymous Oziad bard.

 "Behold the floor of rhymeless rock, where time

 Lies sleeping in a cave, a seamless deep

 And dreamless sleep, unpatterned dark

 Within, without. Time is a reddened dragon.

 The claws refuse to clench, though they are made,

 Are always made in readiness to strike

 The rock, and spark the flint. Then to ignite

 The mouth of time that, burning hot

 And cold in turn, consumes our tattered days... 
 "You have it down cold."

 "And it goes on

 "... en the burst

 Of whitened sulfur spark. The fuse is lit.

 The dragon's furnace starts to roar and ride

 And time, being dreamt within, begins outside."

 Liir was awed. "You've had some schooling before the service."

 "We had to memorize great quaffs ofThe Oziad in primary lessons at St.
Prowd's," said Trism. "I was a day student on a bursary. Got top honors
though."

 "Well, it's awfully, uh, grand," said Liir. "The Time Dragon dreams up
when we're born, when we're to die, and whether for lunch we'll get the
roast pfenix stuffed with creamed oysters at the head table at
St.Prowd's, or the day-old ploughman's, the roadsweeper's budget lunch?"

 "If the unlettered farmers of Munchkinland and the factory workers of
Gillikin believe that their fate is being determined by how the Time
Dragon dreams them up, they don't need to bother to take responsibility
for their actions or for changing their class and station in life."

 "You too," said Liir. "You were brought through primary school to the
services, and the Time Dragon dreamed you there at the head of this
horrible stable. But you don't know what he's going to dream you to do
next. Maybe it's scamper and leave those dragons to their fate."

 "I said already. The family."

 They came to a newsstand shuttered up for the night.ELPHABA LIVES was
scratched in char on the boards. The family! Hah. "They think they own
her," Liir said, suddenly disgusted. "The Witch would be foaming at the
mouth. She was a flaming recluse and a crank." Even the handwriting had
an intimate, proprietary look to it somehow.

 "What do you care?"

 Liir changed the subject. "Maybe it's your job to kill the dragons.
Maybe that's why you're there. Maybe that's why our paths crossed again
today."

 "Are youinsane ? I couldn't do that."

 "You could kill me, or at least you told me that you would. And I'm the
least little lick of flame in your past. If it wasn't Qhoyre, if that
hadn't worked, your superiors would have set up some other straw threat.
I was being used no less than you are now. But I left, Trism. I did. You
could, too."

 "I told you. The parents," he said. "I'm trapped."

 "How would it work?" said Liir. "Quick and permanent? Burn the stables
down? Slice their heads off?"

 Eleven-thirty bell. Time to start back for the barracks.

 "Poison?"

 "Didn't you hear me?" said Trism. "They'll kill my next of kin."

 "Not if you didn't do it," said Liir. "I'll do it. I'll leave a note
saying I did so, and that I kidnapped you as a hostage. You'll be
exonerated. They can't kill my next of kin--I don't have any."

 He didn't add: Anyway, by some rumors, Shell is my next of kin, our
holy Emperor. Let them go after the First Spear, if they must.

 6

 "TELL ME,"said Liir as they stood outside the sentry gate, screwing up
their courage, "how do you mesmerize a dragon?"

 "It's not mesmerism, quite. I focus and I--hum--"

 Liir raised an eyebrow. "Sweet nothings?"

 "Nothing sweet."

 "Come on."

 Trism balked, but Liir pushed. They were both avoiding the risky moment
of trying to get into the base. "Oh, all right," snapped Trism. "Truth
is, my family's not all that exalted, despite the fancy ‘bon' in my
surname. Gentlemen farmers in Gillikin a couple of generations ago, but
the gentlemanly part couldn't be afforded during the drought, and they
farmed to eat after a while. I won a few hog-calling contests, which
brought more shame than glory to the family, and then I did some
sheepdog trials, too. I guess I have a knack. Proved there was dirt
under the fingernails; it made my folks crazy. They were trying to breed up.

 "Goes something like this," he said. "But I'm not telling you the whole
whack: I've picked up the benefits of need-to-know. So this is the
general stuff. I get up close to a dragon, which is hard work by itself.
They're skittish and inbred, given the stocks we have to work with.
Takes time. You have to be totally still and selfless as possible,
become like a rag doll in their pen, till they relax. When they do,
their breathing changes; it slows. I come in close and mount them. No,
you can't ride a dragon, I mean I just climb up the pinions of their
wings and settle my chest on their long strong neck, and straddle them.
I crook my knees around the forward phalange of their wing. I circle the
neck with my arms, the way I'd choke a man if I had to, only gently of
course. This makes their ears fill with blood and stand up. It's
arousal, basically. They're suggestible but also hugely intelligent, and
I hum into their ears. Usually the left one, don't know why; it tends to
cock backward a little more, I think."

 "Itis sweet nothings!"

 "Shut up. I hum, line by line, the shape of the task at hand. If I hum
a dragon to sleep, he sleeps--and I could jump up and down on his
sensitive wings without waking him. If I hum him to fly, to hide, to
hunt, to act alone, to be a team, to unlatch his dangerous claws, to
cut, to scrape, to preserve, to return... 
 "But you didn't hum four dragons to bully a boy-broomist out of the air
and confiscate his broom... 
 "No. And that's the worrying thing. I didn't. How would I know he'd be
there? How could I?"

 "Well," said Liir, "we're not a moment too soon, are we. But listen:
why don't you just hum the dragons into docility? Or make them fly
themselves into dead and deadening Kellswater?" Burning letters of
thatch drowning in Waterslip.

 "I don't think I could. I've always guessed that dragons are,
essentially, antagonists. They take to attack more easily than to, say,
flying in military formation."

 "You could try."

 "Not now. Not tonight." Trism cast a sideways glance at Liir. "I
wouldn't trust myself to be able to concentrate so intently. One lapse
of focus and I'm the midnight snack."

 "No, don't try tonight," agreed Liir hurriedly.

 Trism threw his military cloak around Liir's shoulders to finish what
camouflage they could manage. "On we go, then, and see what happens."

 

 THE SENTRY WASyawning and ready for his relief to arrive. He was
nodding over a pamphlet that looked suspiciously like "The Pieties of
the Apostle," the tract printed at Apple Press Farm. Anyway, its
arguments must have proven leaden and soporific; he waved Liir and Trism
through the guardhouse without a second glance.

 At this hour, the yard was largely deserted. Without opposition Liir
and Trism circled about to the basilica with the stables beneath.

 Since the dragons needed to be stabled, and yet their claws kept honed
for precise military use, the stalls wanted constant cleaning. Dragon
fewmets tended to corrode dragon claws. But some months before, Trism
explained, sloppy stablehands had left behind a bucket of cleansing
solvent helpful in disinfecting the floors of their stone stalls. A
dragon had lapped up a quart and died in its sleep an hour later.

 Several kegs of the germicide, already tapped and ready for dispersal,
stood in the cleaning shed. Trism had keys.

 Liir didn't want to look at the dragons. The coma he'd been in had
blunted the memory of their attack, and that was fine with him. Still,
out of his peripheral vision he allowed himself to take in the golden
blur, the furnace heat, the sharp ammonia pong of breath and semen-sweet
skin, the sound of deep-throated dragon purring.

 But the first dragon turned its nose up at the bucket of risk.

 "Not thirsty?" whispered Liir, when hearing Trism's report.

 "Dragons are smart," said Trism. "That's why they're so trainable. They
learn fast and they remember. This dragon may have seen the other die,
or smelled his death and associated it with the smell of the cleanser.
Maybe if we disguise it somehow."

 The first bell after midnight. They had to work fast in order to have
time to get away.

 "If they won't drink, maybe they'll eat," said Trism at last. "Come on,
the provisions cellar is down this way."

 Into a chilly storeroom they tumbled. Bricks of ice laid out on slate
stones kept the meat cold. At least it was bundled in old newsfolds and
tied with string, so they didn't have to look at it closely. The parcels
were sloppy, more mounded than squared off, about the size of saddlebags.

 "Stop, don't retch," said Trism roughly. "The dragons will smell your
stink and be put off their supper. Don't think of this as human flesh.
It's the delivery of a necessary medicine, that's all. And may the
Unnamed God have mercy on these poor quartered souls, and on ours."

 "And the dragons‘," added Liir, but now he wanted to see them, wanted
to remember that attack, their canny strength. He needed to block out
the thought of what they were carrying, armload by armload, up the
stairs, but when he could no longer do that--peppery tears an inch thick
in his eyes, all of an instant--he steadied himself:

 You poor corpse, you thought you had died in vain, selected for
slaughter by Chyde. You didn't. You're bringing down the House of Shell.
In the most ungodly way, you're doing good. Bless you.

 They doused the parcels with the poisonous decoction. As if they were
tossing lighted coals into pools of flammable fluid, Liir and Trism
dashed up and down the central corridor of the dragon stables, and along
the several transepts, and lobbed the midnight snacks over the stout
stone-ribbed doors. Those dragons who dozed woke up and ripped the
packets open with their teeth. They ate so vigorously that small
glistening gobbets of flesh spun in the air.

 Only when the last one was done did Liir allow himself to climb up on a
bench and look down into a stall.

 The dragon faintly gave off its own coppery light. It was working at
its meal without hesitation, snuffling with greed. The forearms twisted
with a terrifying capacity for grace. The claws retracted, clicked,
leaned against one another in efficient opposition, and gleamed a horny
blue-silver. Then the creature turned and looked at Liir. Slobber fell
from the back of its jaw as it slowed its eating. The intelligent eye--he
could only see one--was gold and black, and its iris, shaped more like a
peapod than a marble, rotated from a horizontal to a vertical slit, and
widened.

 He'd been recognized. This was one of the very beasts that had attacked
him.

 The creature reared up and slapped its heavy wings forward so that its
body arced backward, slamming against the rear wall of the chamber. The
snout raised and the mouth opened, and bloody teeth moved into position,
and a sound issued that was not a bellow nor a snort, but the beginning
of a dragon trumpet volley.

 "Shit, that's not good," said Trism, grabbing him by the shoulder.
"Let's get out of here."

 "They're raising an alarm," said Liir.

 "They're dying, and they know it, and at least one of them knows why."

 7

 TRISM ANDLIIR STOPPEDat the top of the landing. In one direction, the
stairs continued farther up, to the vaulted basilica proper. The door to
the outside, through which they'd come, stood ajar. There was no sound
of anyone dashing about to see what, if anything, was wrong. Maybe
dragons snorted and bellowed in their sleep all night long, and this was
nothing new.

 Liir waited. "What?" said Trism.

 "I'm not leaving without the broom. I've promised myself that."

 "No reason you shouldn't have it back. But we'll have to hurry." Trism
fitted a key into the only other door opening off the landing.

 "Wait here," he said. "Inside is the stuff of nightmares."

 Liir followed him in regardless. In their treason the two men were
bound together, at least for the night, and Liir didn't want to lose
sight of his accomplice.

 The sloped ceiling suggested the long narrow room was a shed appended
to the basilica. Probably built low so as not to interfere with the
colored windows giving into the sacred space above, Liir thought.
Unheated at this hour, the room reeked with the juices of pickling
agents and tanning acids.

 Trism used a quickflint to light a portable oil lamp. "Keep your eyes
down, if you're going to follow me in here," he muttered, shielding the
light from the glass chimney with one hand. "The broom is in the far
cupboard, and I'll have to fiddle with the lock." He hurried between
tall slanted tables on which some sort of piecework was in progress.

 "How much danger are we in?" asked Liir.

 "You mean in the next five minutes, or for the rest of our short, sorry
lives? The answer's the same: lots."

 The small light went with Trism toward the cupboard. In the returning
shadows, Liir moved nervously and disturbed a pile of wooden hoops about
a foot across. They clattered to the floor. "Shhh, if you possibly can,"
called Trism in a hoarse whisper.

 Picking up the materials, Liir listened to the sounds. The dragons
below, snorting and nickering, and their wings like vast bellows
pumping. The jangle of Trism's key ring, heavy old iron skeletons
throttling against the glassy tinkle of smaller jewel case keys. The
snap and thrust of a lock being pulled back, and then the rustle of
dried sedge and straw. The broom. Elphie's broom. Again.

 He had to see it, as Trism turned; he looked up in something like love.
Trism had the Witch's cape looped ungainly over one arm, and the broom
under his elbow, as he fiddled to close the closet again and lock its
door. Then he turned, and held the light up so he could see his way back
to Liir. He was smiling. So, too, in a sense, were the semblance of
faces that sprung out of the shadows on the inside wall of the chamber.
Ten or twelve or so, plates of face: creepy voodoo stuff, Liir thought
at first. The scraped faces, repaired with catgut twine where needed,
were strung with rawhide cord inside beech-wood hoops like the ones Liir
had upset.

 "Shhh, will you shush?" said Trism. "I told you not to look."

 8

 SOME MOMENTS LATER,when at Liir's insistence they had finished removing
the dozen remnants of human countenance, and had stored them in two
satchels, Trism said, "If you're really serious about leaving a note
claiming responsibility, now's the time to do it. Can you manage ink and
a pen?"

 "I know how to write," said Liir. "I didn't go to St. Prowd's, but Ican
write."

 "Shut up. I mean, are your muscles shaking too much to control the nib?"

 He had to work at it. The third parchment was good enough to serve.

 I abducted your craven dragonmaster and aborted his evil work. He will
pay for his offenses against lonely travelers.

 Signed, Liir son of Elphaba

 "Son of Elphaba?" said Trism. "Notthe Elphaba?" He looked at Liir with
a new respect, or maybe it was outright disbelief. Or dawning horror?

 "Probably not," said Liir, "but if no one can prove it so, it's equally
hard to disprove, isn't it?"

 Trism looked at the note again. "Iscraven overdoing it a bit?"

 "Let's go."

 "I hope this is only rhetoric, that I'll pay for my offenses."

 "You will pay, Trism. You will. We all do. You'll pay, but you won't
pay me." He clutched the broom. "You've already paid me."

 As they hurried away, the noise rose. The poisoned dragons were falling
into fits, roaring, throwing themselves against the walls of their
stables. The basilica above shook with it.

 9

 THEY DIDN'T DAREpresent themselves at an inn or a hotel at that hour of
the night, and all of the gates of the City were closed. After skulking
about in the fog, they eventually hopped a fence in one of the City's
small private cemeteries, and found a lean-to used for wheelbarrows and
digging supplies. The mist turned to a thunderous rain, sheeted with
weird winter lightning. There, under the cape, they huddled for warmth,
and shuddered. Just before they fell asleep, Liir murmured, "No humming,
now."

 They rose before dawn. Trism had enough coin in his pocket to buy them
milky tea and a few cream biscuits from the first street vendor. They
argued about the best way to leave the City without detection, but their
bravery had subsided. They chose Shiz Gate because the welfare of the
Emerald City and the northern province of Gillikin were the most tightly
entwined, and the traffic there the heaviest.

 Providence provides: that's why it's called providence. They shambled
through Shiz Gate by helping an old merchant whose wagon had suffered a
split wheel on the cobbles. The sentries at Shiz Gate paid them little
mind, deep in gossip of their own about the attack on the basilica the
night before. Word of it was abroad already.

 Once through, they abandoned the hapless old man in his search for a
wheelwright, and ambled north until they came to a high road looping
back. Hatless, in civilian clothes, they meandered westward, the
gleaming profile of the Emerald City always at their left shoulders. The
sun rose, shone for a while, and then became cloaked in cloud. By
nightfall they'd reached the outskirts of Westgate. Liir wanted to keep
on toward the Shale Shallows, until he could recognize one of the tracks
that led southeast through the oakhair forest, between the great lakes,
and back toward Apple Press Farm.

 But their limbs, by now, would go no farther, so they counted up their
coin. As night fell, colder than the one before, they presented
themselves at the door of a ramshackle tavern and inn on the main
Kellswater Road. A sign readingWELCOME ARMS dangled on a broken hinge
from the lamppost. The Gillikin River ran close by, gurglingly, and bare
willows hung over it like ghostly harps.

 "Oh, there's not much by way of rooms tonight, only two," said the
matron, a tall spindly older woman whose unkempt grey hair spilled from
her bonnet. "The locals shivareed a new married couple last night, don't
you know, so the best room is a mess. I wouldn't put my own disgusting
mother in there. They'll pay, that lot, but meanwhile I'm shy of
chambers. I don't want to give you the big room, as I often have a party
arriving from the City an hour after the close of gates, don't you know,
and they pay government rates. Very nice little sinecure for a widow on
her own. But up top a'that there's a space not much used. No fireplace,
mind, but I'll gift you with extra blankets. You're young and hot and
you won't notice."

 She rustled them a supper, buckled mutton with a side of tadmuck,
stringy and dried out but warm enough to satisfy. Perhaps a bit lonely,
she poured them drinks of yellow wine, and kept them company through the
first bottle and the second. But then there were horses in the yard, and
she stirred herself to her feet, yawning. "It's the trade I was hoping
for, so if it's all the same to you, gentlemen, I'll leave you to a good
slumber if you please."

 They found their way. The flight of steps led only to their chamber.
The small room was an architectural afterthought, the result of a failed
attempt at dignity, a mansarded cap on the larger guest dormitory below.
Cold, indeed. More a storage space with a feather bed in it than a
chamber for guests. A tall round-topped, gabled window was set in the
middle of each slanting wall.

 Liir sat down, weighted with fatigue and a little tipsy, on the edge of
a trunk. The thing was felted with dust. They shouldn't have to pay a
penny for this attic.

 Trism left to wash in the sink on the landing. Liir stared at shadows,
seeing nothing. The smell, the sight, the notion of killing dragons--and
what would Elphaba have thought of that?

 But he wasn't Elphaba; most days he was barely Liir.

 He'd gone to get the broom, only, so he could fly for the Birds,
ambassador for them. Then they would pay him by looking for Nor--or so
they said. How could he identify her? He didn't even know what she
looked like after all this time.

 Then, he'd done more. He'd murdered the herd of dragons. The Birds
would be able to fly free now. He wouldn't need to fly with them or for
them: he'd removed the deterrence.

 Trism came back. "Asleep sitting up?" Water slicked down the blond
hairs on his thighs. He didn't smell sweet and soapy, just less sour.
His green tunic, unbuttoned at the neck and released from the belted
leggings, was long enough to preserve modesty and serve as a nightshirt.
"I think our dame has got the custom she hoped for, by the sound of it.
More bottles opening downstairs. Hope they don't keep us awake; they'll
be sleeping right under us."

 Ratty brocaded drapes, dating from no later than the days of the Ozma
Regent, hung thickly on either side of the windows. Liir regarded the
four separate glimpses of night: night north, south, east, and west.

 "Come to bed," said Trism. "It's freezing."

 Liir didn't answer.

 "Come on. Why not?"

 "The moonlight," he said at last. "It's so--seeing."

 "Well, I'm not going to go to sleep until you lie down. Do you think
I'm going to turn my back so you can stick a knife in me? I remember
that line:he will pay for his offenses ."

 "That was theatrical." Liir shuddered. "It's the moon, I guess," he said.

 Trism got up and moved across the floor, huffing in irritation.
"Paranoia. Very attractive. No one can see in windows this high, Liir.
But we'll block the moon for you, then." The sills of the windows were
three feet from the floor, and the columnar bulk of the heavy drapes
rose six feet higher than that. Trism said, "Move, you," and nudged Liir
off the trunk, which he dragged to the first window. From there Trism
climbed to the windowsill, his clean bare feet pawing in the grit and
dust for purchase.

 He reached up. The curtains hadn't been shifted in decades, and they
resisted. He grunted. The light of the moon fell on his ear tips, his
lifting shoulders as his fingers just grazed the center of the curtain
rod and walked their way east and west toward the edges of the drapes.

 "Oh, company," he said. "Those horses in the yard--five of them. They've
got the Emperor's caparisons. This is a soldiers' sleepery."

 "Welcome Arms. I suppose it figures." Liir came up behind to look. As
Trism stretched, the shirttail lifted above his shapely rear. Liir
reached out and settled his hands there, to support Trism should he
fall, for the ledge was shallow and Trism's balance precarious. Trism
made a sound in his throat.

 He managed to dislodge the first volute of brocade an inch or two, and
a colony of blue moths, the size of penny blossoms just going by, issued
forth and settled upon them both. A thousand pinches without fingers.

 The brocade shifted some more. The drapes were cut from an old tapestry
design. Once pink and yellow and rose, it was now the color of dirt and
ash, but the ravaged faces of society charmers still peered out through
threaded expressions. Moths are the death of brocade potentates and
hostesses, pavilions and rose arbors and islands in some impossible sea.
Moths eat such faces alive. The faces of living humans they merely
explore, and the peninsulas of their forearms, and the promontories of
their breastbones, and the shallows of their tympanic chests, which when
heard close up thunder too loudly for moths to notice.

 "Right," whispered Trism hoarsely.

 "Come on," Liir answered. "We have to be quiet. Maybe these soldiers
aren't looking for us. Maybe she's too drunk to remember we're here.
There's no way out, anyway. Not till they're asleep, at least."

 "We could jump out the window into the river."

 "Too late for that; we've already jumped. Anyway, I'm going to jump you
now. Come on, to bed. It's just the next part of history, right? If
we're going to be found, we might as well be found out."

 10

 DESPITE THEIR EXHAUSTION,they hardly slept. They clung to each other,
making the least possible noise, and when it got too much to bear they
buried their faces in pillows. Spent, at least briefly, they dozed, and
Liir's last thought was: sleeping with the talent. A dragon mesmerist,
of all things--what magic a body is--all that you couldn't know about the
world packed up tightly in the flesh lying on your breast.

 All the things Ansonby and Burny had known about--not about girls, but
about people--how they felt when they were closer than clothes could ever
be. How secret, still: how still, and secret. But a connection
nonetheless, dared and decided: a new way of knowing, new burning
letters falling through the air--and the words that could be spelled
weren't all disastrous.

 At last, in the deadest part of the night, they crept back into their
clothes and braved the staircase. From the larder they nicked a hock of
ham, and from the pasture by the river's edge they nicked two horses.
Trism's way with dragons, it seemed, had suggested to him a language for
comforting horses, too.

 They led the horses away by the river's edge, where the noise of the
water would afford the best cover. A mile out, Trism showed Liir how to
climb into the saddle. Liir had never ridden before. "I'm not sure
tonight's the best night for this lesson," he said. "Ow."

 "It's the next part of history. Now, where are we going?"

 "Are we going together?"

 "We seem to be. For now, anyway."

 Liir shrugged. "We've got to cross the Gillikin River and keep
Kellswater on our right. South through the oakhair forest." As far as
Apple Press Farm, he thought, but he didn't want to say that yet.

 "I don't know these parts, but if we're crossing the river, let's not
wait for a bridge. We'll ford it here where we can, and confound the
soldiers if they come looking for their rides."

 The moon was nearly down, but there was enough light for the horses to
pick their way safely across the water. They gained the far bank, which
rose to a prominence. Looking back, the fellows could see the Welcome
Arms they'd abandoned. From here, with its smaller second story, it
looked like a lopsided old boot.

 "The Boot of the Apostle," said Liir.

 "The Apostle only wears sandals, to judge by the graphics advertising
that exhibit. That Apostle Muscle exhibit."

 They rode till dawn, though at a safely slow pace, keeping to well-worn
tracks. Gradually the sky lightened, cheerless and without bold
character, the look of molasses dissolving in milk. They hoped a wind
would arise to shift the scratchy snow and cloak their tracks, but it
didn't.

 By the time they could see their own breath in the cold dawn, they had
reached the edge of the Shale Shallows. They could begin to move faster.
They were now apparent to each other again, though in the daylight it
was harder to meet one another's eyes. They didn't talk much.

_ Siege_

 1

 SISTERAPOTHECAIRE WASdrying her hair with a towel when Sister Doctor
rushed into the ablutory. "He's back," she said.

 Sister Apothecaire did not need to ask whohe was. "With the girl?"

 "No. With a boy. Well, a young man, I mean."

 "Do up my veil snap, will you, Sister? I'mhurrying ."

 Along the stairs, they met Sister Cook. "Famished the both,
malnourished the one, perhaps, though I'm not a doctor, being only the
cook," she reported. "They're both deeply into their third helping of
sausage and beans. The Superior Maunt is waiting in her chamber."

 Indeed she was. Her hands were composed upon her lap, and her eyes
closed in prayer. "Forgive me, sisters," she said when they came
forward. "Obligation before devotion, I know. Won't you sit down?"

 "We hear that Liir is back," said Sister Doctor. "We should like the
chance to see him."

 "To inspect him. To meet with him."

 The Superior Maunt raised her eyebrows. Sister Apothecaire blushed. "I
merely meant that it would be useful in our professional practice to
know what the cause of his peculiar ailments actually was. Likewise we
are quite in the dark as to the treatment Candle applied that helped him
to recover so."

 "Of course," said the Superior Maunt. "And I'm eager to know as well.
But I have other responsibilities this morning. The unexpected arrivals
are breaking their fast in the refectory, I believe, but I have made an
appointment to counsel our other guest in the small chapel. I don't
believe I should break my appointment with her. So you will conduct the
interview jointly and report to me."

 "Yes, Mother."

 She dismissed them, but then called after, "Sisters."

 They turned.

 "In women of your age and station, it is unseemly to pelt so. The young
men will not have left."

 "Pardon us," said Sister Doctor. "But of course the last time we hoped
to find him, hehad left."

 "He hasn't asked as much yet, but I believe he's requesting sanctuary,"
said the Superior Maunt. "I'm afraid he won't be leaving very soon. You
have time. Practice continence in your expression of enthusiasm."

 "Yes. Indeed. Quite."

 "You may go."

 They stood there. "Go!" repeated the Superior Maunt wearily.

 She closed her eyes again, but this time not in prayer. The new winter
was approaching. Another winter in the mauntery of Saint Glinda. Fires
that would not warm her papery skin. Fruit that would grow mealy in the
larder. Increased agitation among the maunts, for when there was less
work in the gardens there was more gossip and bitchery in the sewing
compound. There would be new leaks to repair, and ague would knock a few
of the old ones into the grave. She wondered if it would be her turn.

 She couldn't hope for this. She didn't hope for it. But the rewards of
the winter season seemed richer in her childhood memories, back before
she had these tiresome women to govern--the silly affectations of
Lurlinemas, which even professed maunts in their strictness remembered
with pleasure--the spectacle of sunlight staining birch shadows into the
snow like laundry blueing--the way snow fell up as well as down, if the
wind had its way--of course, the way birds returned, stitching the spring
back into place by virtue of melody.

 It was the gardens of her girlhood she remembered most, the earliest
blossoms. Jonquils and fillarettes and snowdrops, perfect as the Dixxi
House porcelain bibelots that had adorned her mother's dressing table.
She had not seen a fillarette in years, except in her mind. How sweet it
was to regard!

 She prayed for strength to last the winter out. These days, though, she
rarely got into the fourth line of a beloved old epiphody before her
mind skipped back through some pasture or garden walk of her youth.

 Attend, she barked at herself, and stood with difficulty. The cold was
already at work in her joints. She creaked as she readied herself for
the morning conversation. Noting the raggedness of the face flannel with
which she wiped her brow, she hoped that the mauntery's guest might have
come to propose a sizeable donation. Or even a little one. But this was
beyond what the Superior Maunt thought it was proper to pray for, so she
didn't spend her prayer in that direction.

 Wisdom is not the understanding of mystery, she said to herself, not
for the first time. Wisdom is accepting that mystery is beyond
understanding. That's whatmakes it mystery.

 

 THE FELLOWS WERE NEARLY KEELING OVERinto their coffee cups. "You've had
no sleep, you've been riding all night," said Sister Doctor,
disapprovingly. "It's a dangerous track at best, and foolhardy to
venture upon if you don't know your way. Have you come from the Emerald
City?"

 "We've been round and about," said Liir.

 Sister Doctor explained that she and Sister Apothecaire had briefly
tended to Liir when he'd been brought in by Oatsie Manglehand, the
captain of the Grasstrail Train. "Have you any recollection of that?"
she pressed.

 "I know very little about anything," he said. "I'm useless, pretty much."

 "Any more cheese, d'you think?" asked Trism, draining his noggin of ale.

 "You were here for weeks, I'm afraid," Sister Doctor remarked to Liir.
"Without the ministrations of our community you should certainly have died."

 "Perish the thought. I'm alive, for what it's worth."

 "What Sister Doctor is trying to ascertain, in her skittery way, is how
Candle did it," interrupted Sister Apothecaire. "She was mute as a
lilac, and seemed not overly canny. Yet she managed a miracle with you."

 "Professional curiosity requires us to ask how," inserted Sister Doctor.

 "Professional jealousy requires it, too," admitted Sister Apothecaire.

 "I don't know." The boy had a private look. "In any event, I wasn't
consulted."

 "Oh, she leached him, she took a lancet and bled him, she sucked his
poison out, and a good thing, too," said a biddy on a bench nearby. They
hadn't noticed her there.

 "Why, Mother Yackle!" bellowed Sister Doctor in a matronizing manner.
"Aren't you the chatty one today!" She shared a wrinkled expression with
Sister Apothecaire. The dotty old thing. Ought to be in the solarium
with the other silly dears.

 "She's got a good instinct, that Candle," said Yackle. "The oafs are
pleasant enough to bed, in their way, but it takes a daughter of Lurlina
to draw out the milk only boys can make... 
 "Shame and scandal on the house," said Sister Apothecaire. "Gentleboys,
forgive her. You know, their minds wander at that age, and the sense of
propriety wobbles ferociously."

 Liir turned to look at the woman. Her veil was pulled forward, but the
splayed nostrils of her long rude nose showed. "Are you the one who
directed us to the farm in the overgrown orchard?" he said.

 "She never!" said Sister Apothecaire. "Liir, she's yesterday's
potatoes, and mashed at that. Don't pay her any mind."

 In a low voice, almost masculine in gruffness, Mother Yackle replied
slowly, "I mindmy own business ."

 "Of course you do," said Sister Doctor.

 "But if I were you, I'd send those soldiers' horses packing," continued
Mother Yackle. "You don't want them found on the premises, I'd warrant."

 Liir shrugged, then nodded.

 "Look," said Sister Doctor, "this isn't the place to talk. Finish up,
lads; we need to have a heart-to-heart."

 But Trism had fallen asleep against the back of his chair, and Liir's
eyelids were lowering as they watched. There was nothing for the maunts
to do but show them to the cots in the guest quarters, and find
blankets, and retreat.

 2

 LIIR, NEARLY ASLEEP,tossed his body back and forth on the lumpy straw
of the bedding. It was as if he had been here before.

 Well, he had, but in a feeble enough way. In childhood he'd been more
aware of the hems of Elphaba's skirts, of the food in the wooden bowls.
An awful lot of oatmeal mush. And more recently, he'd been broken and
mindless, wandering his past in a feverish state. Even the night he and
Candle had left the mauntery, and she had helped him move, as good as
carried him on her back down the stairs, nearly, the halls had been
dark. He'd collapsed into the donkey cart and slipped almost immediately
into a real sleep, a sleep of fatigue and not one of voyage.

 That was his first apprehension of Candle, he remembered. A slip of a
thing with the strength and willpower of a pack horse. She'd been mostly
naked, and Mother Yackle had thrown a cloak over her shoulders. Here in
the mauntery again, Liir tried to lean into that recent memory, the way
he had learned to steep himself in other memories. Maybe there was
something yet to be understood about whether he'd actually slept with
her, impregnated her... en more, whether and in what ways he might love her.

 Now--a thousand difficult lonely miles away from Trism, who snored a
yard to the east--Liir turned over, facing the wall. Candle was a cipher
to him, sweet and elusive, and the memory was frail. There was nothing
more he could unpack from it, nothing useful. To distract himself, in
his heart and memory he walked about and examined the hull of the
mauntery, doing a kind of spectral surveillance.

 The place betrayed its origins as a gardkeep. It was a fortified house,
here on a slight wooded rise, an oasis of trees in the Shale Shallows.
The ground floor had no windows, and the front door was reinforced with
iron bracing. Behind, the kitchen looked out on a greasy moat crossed by
a simple drawbridge. The vegetable plots and cow barn were beyond.

 The mauntery would afford little protection in a siege. The place was
tall and, at this stage in its history, unsecurable for very long. In
any effort to gain unlawful access, a modern police force might be
slowed, but it wouldn't be stayed.

 Still, at least a few cows could be swept into the parlor, and hay
stacked up under the stairs. The fruits of the harvest crowded the
shelves and larders, and the garde-manger was bulbous with blood
sausage, dried muttock, and nine varieties of salami, to say nothing of
cheeses. There was a mushroom cellar and a bin of desiccated fish
fragments. And plenty of wine, and that wonderful rarity in a rural
establishment, an indoor well.

 In his dreams he checked the cupboards for rifles, he blew through each
room to look for wardrobes that could be pushed against windows. He did
not see the Superior Maunt asking questions of her esteemed guest about
the payout schedule of a proposed beneficial annuity. He didn't see
Mother Yackle nodding in her own morning nap in the sunlight. He didn't
see nor overhear Sister Doctor and Sister Apothecaire squabbling gently
in their shared cubicle about how they ought to proceed. The rooms were
empty of novices, maunts, guests, spiders, mice, bedbugs, and any
presence of the Unnamed God that he could determine.

 What he saw, in the topmost room where he had lain, was a figure on a
rush-bottomed chair, sitting away from the light, twisting her hands.
Her dark hair was looped up on her head with no regard for neatness or
propriety, just to get it out of the way. Her eyes were closed, but he
didn't think she could be praying. He didn't know what she was doing. At
her feet was a largish basket woven of twigs. He didn't look into it; he
couldn't. Every now and then her shoeless foot would nip out from
beneath the dark hem of her skirt and give the basket a little push, and
because of its rounded bottom, the basket rocked for a time. Then the
green foot would appear again, and start the rocking over.

 

 HE WOKE WITH A START.It was sharp noon, and the house smelled of warm
leek-and-cabbage eggery for lunch. Trism was still asleep, his hair
rucked back against the pillow. The sound of cantering horse hoofs grew
louder. Liir wanted to kiss Trism awake, but had the notion that the
time for that was already over.

 He did it anyway. Trism groaned, and made room, and after a while said,
"We don't do this sort of thing in our circle."

 Did he mean his class at St. Prowd's? His family? The Home Guard?
Didn't matter. Liir replied, "Well, your circle seems to have widened,
hasn't it."

 "Or shrunk," said Trism, reaching for his boots.

 3

 "THEY'RE LOOKING FOR TWOmen," said Sister Doctor.

 "Indeed," said the Superior Maunt.

 "One is said to have kidnapped the other."

 "Our guests appear to be on a more familiar footing than hostage and
abductor, don't you think?"

 "Well--yes."

 "So tell the soldiers we haven't seen the men they're seeking, and bid
them good day."

 "The thing is," said Sister Doctor, "they're said to be quite
dangerous, these fellows. In an act of desecration, they imploded the
Emerald City basilica of the Emperor by causing combustible dragons
to--combust."

 "How dreadful. I don't think our two look very dangerous, though.
Underfed, if you ask me, and perhaps undecided in their emotions, but
not dangerous."

 Sister Doctor came back. "I've been told that one of the two they're
seeking is named Liir."

 "I see. Well, tell them he's not here."

 "Mother Maunt. I question your--propriety. Is that not a lie?"

 "Well, if one of the two that they seek is named Liir, one isnot named
Liir. So answer in reference to that one, and say he's not here."

 "That is devious, Mother Maunt."

 "I'm old and muddled. Put it down to that, if you must comfort
yourself," she replied sharply. "But I'm still in charge, Sister, so do
as I say."

 Sister Doctor came back a third time. "They are more explicit. The
Commander says that they are seeking Liir Thropp, the son of the Wicked
Witch of the West."

 "As I live and breathe, Sister Doctor! You extend more respect for my
authority than is useful. Need I come up with every rejoinder? Are you
never to think for yourself? To the best of my knowledge it hasn't been
conclusively determined that Liir is the son of the witch. So, again,
since we cannot answer for certain that the person they seek is here,
they must conduct their searches elsewhere. Give them my blessing and
tell them to hurry, or do I have to come and do it myself?"

 Sister Doctor yelled the message out the windows of the scriptorium.
The Commander called back, "If you're not harboring felons, why are your
doors blocked?"

 "Spring cleaning."

 "It's early winter, Sister Thudhead."

 "We're behind schedule. We've been dreadfully busy."

 "Busy harboring criminals?"

 "I hate to be rude, but I've work to do. Good-bye."

 By late afternoon the thud of stones against the door had become
intolerable, and the Superior Maunt herself came to the window. The
armed contingent had to interrupt the attack in order to hear her
quavery voice.

 "It's an inconvenient time to come calling," she said. "For one thing,
ladies in community tending to have their menses together, you find an
entire household of terribly cross and uncompromising people. We're not
up to housing a garrison of soldiers, however rudely they pound on our
doors. Please go away at once."

 "Mother Maunt," said the Commander. "This household received its
original charter from the Palace, and it is with the authority of the
Palace that I come and demand access. Your studied resistance proves you
are harboring criminals. We know they stayed at an inn last night, and
they cannot have come much farther than here today."

 "Matters of authority are perplexing, I agree," replied the old woman,
"and I would love to stand here in the icy wind and discuss them fully,
but my ancient lungs won't stand it. Our original charter, by way of our
motherchapel in the Emerald City, does comes from the Palace, I'll
concede. But I'll remind you that the Palace in question was the Palace
of the crown of Ozma, many generations back, and in any instance we have
earned the right to self-governance."

 "The Palace of Ozma is long over, and it's the Palace of the Emperor
that comes calling now. He is favored by unionist acclaim, and by dint
of his apostleship you are under his bidding."

 "He is a parvenu Emperor, and he does not speak for the Unnamed God to
me," she cried. "And unless he asked for it, no more would I speak of
the Unnamed God to him. I reject his expedient and proprietary faith. We
stand here on our own chilblained feet, without apology and without
genuflection."

 "Is this an indication that the Mauntery of Saint Glinda has endorsed
and even overseen the publication of recent treasonous broadsheets
attacking the spiritual legitimacy of the Emperor?"

 The Superior Maunt made a most uncharacteristic gesture.

 "That's hardly an answer the courts would recognize. Good Mother
Maunt," came the reply, "let us not distract ourselves with the luxury
of theology--"

 "For me it is no luxury, believe me--"

 "I know the boy you are harboring. I met him when he was only a boy, at
the castle of Kiamo Ko in the Kells. When fate brought him in my path
again, not once but twice, I suspected he had the makings of a firebrand
in him. I made it my business to convince him of the rightness of the
Emerald City cause. He might have knowledge of Elphaba, or of her
missing Grimmerie. I named him my secretary in Qhoyre. I promoted him. I
fathered him as best I could. Now listen: he was not Elphaba's match. He
could not be her son--too docile and biddable. But he should give himself
up regardless. He has kidnapped a soldier of the Emperor and destroyed
the basilica of the army."

 "Commander," replied the Superior Maunt, "you can save your breath. And
you can put down those archaic crossbows or whatever you're readying.
We've got company that it would be unseemly for you to disturb."

 She turned and beckoned. A figure appeared at the window and lowered a
shawl off her forehead. The glitter in the eyebrows stood out in the
falling light. Commander Cherrystone made a gesture and the men dropped
their weapons as the Superior Maunt intoned, "The widow of Lord
Chuffrey, Oz's former throne minister, making a religious retreat to the
mauntery that bears the same name that she does. Lady Glinda."

 4

 ANOVICE OPENED THE DOOR for Liir and pointed him into the simple
paneled parlor, and closed the door behind him without a sound.

 "I was told you were in the country," said Liir.

 "But I was," answered Glinda. "I am. I had intended to travel from
Mockbeggar Hall, our--well, my--country house to come make a bequest to
this mauntery. Lord Chuffrey has left me quite wealthy, you know, and I
thought it time to help the women in their good works.

 "But when my under-butler arrived last night on horseback with news of
the attack on the basilica, I decided to change my schedule and come
here straightaway. I have a commitment to this house, and I wanted my
new bequest registered before there was any move toward disestablishment."

 Her glamour was all the more ridiculous and appealing in this setting.
"It's good to see a familiar face," said Liir.

 "I suppose I shouldn't be surprised to findyou here. After all, Elphaba
was here for a while, you know. It's one of the reasons I like to
support it."

 "I know she was."

 "She tended the dying."

 "And the living," he said, remembering his dream of the basket. "I'm
sorry about your husband."

 "Oh, well." She waved her hand dismissively but then dabbed at her
nostril with a scrap of lacy roundel. "We largely went our own ways; it
was that kind of a marriage. Now he's gone his own way for good. I miss
him more than I would ever have let on while he was alive. I suppose
I'll get over it."

 She cheered up almost instantly. "Now tell me about you. Last I
remember, you were marching off to Southstairs to find some little
friend or other. I lost track of what happened. Well, there was the
court to manage, and various putsches to suppress." She regarded him.
"No, I suppose it was ruthless of me to forget about you as soon as you
left. I've never been good at keeping up with people. I'm sorry."

 Liir remembered that he had momentarily hoped for Glinda as a mother.
He pushed the thought aside. "You know the Emperor," he said. "None
other than Shell. Elphaba's younger brother."

 "Wouldn't she be surprised to know her brother had succeeded the
Wizard!" She looked rueful.

 "Surprised," said Liir. "That's one way to put it."

 "Well, yes. She'd be outraged. Piety as the new political aphrodisiac.
I suppose that's what you mean."

 He shrugged. "What someone would feel after she's dead--that notion
means little to me. She doesn't feel. All that's left of her--shades and
echoes, and fading by the hour."

 Glinda closed her breviary with a little slap. She hadn't been
attending closely to her devotions anyway. "That pesky slogan you see
scrawled everywhere is right. She does live, you know. She does."

 Liir snapped at her. "I have no truck with that kind of sentiment. All
butchers and simpletons ‘live' in that sense."

 Glinda raised her chin. "No, Liir. She lives. People sing of her. You
wouldn't guess it, being you--but they do. There's a musical noise around
her name; there are things people remember, and pass on."

 "People can pass on lies and hopes as well as shards of memory."

 "You refuse to be consoled, don't you? Well, that's as much proof asI
could ever need that you're kin to her. She was the same way. The very
same way."

 5

 THE SITUATION,the Superior Maunt concluded that evening, was decidedly
unsettled. Scouting from the highest windows in all directions, the
novices reported that several dozen armed horsemen showed signs of
making camp in the Shale Shallows. They'd broken into the kitchen
gardens and rooted about in the shed for squashes and such. "It seems
unfeeling not to provide them with a meal," said the Superior Maunt,
"but I suppose that might give the wrong impression."

 Liir and Trism asked for an audience, and she sat with them on a bench
at the base of a flight of steps. "We can't have the house put in danger
on our behalf," said Liir. "Between Trism and me, while working in the
Home Guard, we've been responsible for enough loss of life. We didn't
know the dragons would explode. We didn't intend to bring down the
basilica. We don't know if there was human death in that catastrophe. We
want to do no further damage, if we can help it. We shall give ourselves
up to them."

 "Since it may ease your minds on that score, I will tell you that I
heard of no loss of human life in the collapse of the basilica," said
the Superior Maunt. "It was midnight, after all. The place was deserted,
even the side sheds and storerooms that escaped being crushed by falling
debris. I suspect, however, your foes imagine the basilica was your real
target, and the death of the dragons--how do they term it these
days?--collateral damage. As to your suggestion that you should turn
yourselves in, let me take it up in council before you make your decisions."

 "What is council?" asked Trism.

 "I don't know. I'm going to find out," she replied.

 

 THEY GATHERED IN THE CHAPEL,the only room in the mauntery large enough
to hold all inhabitants and guests. Evening devotions usually occurred
on a basis of rotations, some maunts handling kitchen washup or
geriatric babysitting while the rest sank into quiet prayer or early
nap. Tonight the Superior Maunt requested the attendance of all, even
those retired maunts like Mother Yackle who were on the edge of gaga.

 Lady Glinda, though a benefactress, refused a seat on the dais up
front, and she had removed her trademark diamond strutted collar for a
quieter linen ruff. Liir and Trism, unfamiliar with these traditions,
stayed standing. The older maunts were escorted in, in wheeled chairs
when necessary; the novices took their places on their knees until the
Superior Maunt indicated they should sit. "This is not prayer," she
said. "Something like it, but not prayer, precisely."

 She sat herself down, with difficulty. After a short silence, Sister
Hymnody offered a provocatory in plaintone, though her sweet bell-like
voice quavered. They were all on edge.

 "Sisters, mothers, friends, and family. I shall be brief. Our tradition
of charity, reinforced by our vows, brings us this evening into a
conflict none of us has anticipated or experienced before. However
generous the tithe of Lady Glinda, I doubt it will rebuild this house
should the army of the Emperor sack it.

 "We are a small house, a mission post on the road halfway between our
motherchapel in the Emerald City and the rest of the world. Our
isolation has been the cause of loneliness, at times, but also promoted
peace and protection. Perhaps even provocation--but I pass over that.
Tonight we are neither isolated nor peaceful. It is a truth we must accept.

 "I am an old woman. I was raised as a novice in the venerable practice
of obedience. Under the rubric of our order I followed instruction,
including the one that required me, years ago, to take charge of this
mauntery and govern it until death.

 "I still believe in obedience. Even while soldiers camp outside our
walls, and quite likely call for reinforcements, I must be obedient to
the wishes of the powers that placed me here.

 "As I speak these words, my dear friends, I hear in them an echo of the
Emperor's remarks. He professes subservience to the highest aims and
intentions of the Unnamed God. God is the mouthpiece and the Emperor is
his striking arm. The First Spear.

 "I have not met the Emperor, and I will not. I should decline an
invitation were one offered. The Emperor has hijacked the great force of
faith and diverted it to further the prosperity and dominance of the
City. Who can argue with a man who has the voice of the Unnamed God
speaking exclusively in his ear? Not I. I have never heard such a voice.
I have only heard the echo that still reverberates, once the Unnamed God
stopped speaking and the world took up with itself.

 "In our house, we profess to believe that the Unnamed God has made us
in its likeness and its image, and this should have enlarged us to be
like the Unnamed God. I fear in the Emerald City, they have remade the
Unnamed God in their image, and that has belittled and betrayed the
deity. Can the Unnamed God be belittled, you ask. No, of course not. But
the deity can go unrecognized, and return to mystery."

 The sisters shifted. Many of the novices were ignorant of the Emperor's
apostasy, and the shoals of theocracy were beyond their ability to
navigate. The Superior Maunt noticed.

 She stood. "Bring me two other chairs, one at my right and one at my
left," she said. This was done.

 "The Unnamed God retreats into mystery, and is not especially localized
in my heart, my dears. Nor in the Emperor's. The mystery is as equally
in your heart as in mine, and in... e spirit of the trees and the... e
music of water. That sort of thing. In the memory of our elders. In the
hope for the newborn.

 "I break with the tradition of our house tonight, as the decisions now
to be made involve your lives as well as mine. I am old; happily I would
go to my sweet reward this evening were it provided me by a literal
spear of the Emperor. I cannot ask the same of you. Therefore it is my
wish that henceforth the mauntery--even if our residency here lasts only
till dawn--shall be governed not by a single voice, but by a troika of
voices. Were the disagreeables not outside our walls, I should invite
your opinions and call for a ballot. Time prevents me from allowing
that. In extremis, our family of maunts shall accept the leadership of
three. Sister Doctor, will you rise to the chair?"

 Sister Doctor gaped. She grasped Sister Apothecaire's hand briefly, and
moved forward. Sister Apothecaire trembled and moved to the edge of her
seat, perching for approach.

 "I shall take the second seat," said the Superior Maunt. "I may be old,
but I'm not dead."

 The room was so still that the sounds of horses whinnying and stamping
outside carried through the cold.

 "The third chair I am reserving for the novice known as Candle,"
declared the Superior Maunt. "I have a notion we shall see her again.
For how long, I don't know. But we need the wisdom of age, the strength
of the fit, and the initiative of the young. From this moment forward,
my absolute command over this establishment is dissolved. I shall enter
it so in the Log of the House before I retire. Now, let us see how we
get on."

 Sister Apothecaire bit her lip and tried to feel more humble than
humiliated.

 Skirts rustled as the women shifted. Faint whispering, unprecedented in
the chapel, sounded, like faraway wind. The Superior Maunt dropped her
forehead into her fingers and breathed deeply, feeling that the world
had changed utterly, and wondering how quickly she would regret this action.

 In the stillness, Lady Glinda stood. Reticence not being her usual
thing, she'd had about enough: and anyway, hadn't the Superior Maunt
called for a collaborative spirit? "If I may speak," she began, in a
tone that implied she knew she could not be denied, "even if the army
breaks through the defenses of this mauntery, they cannot do you good
women much harm. There will be no bloodshed or rape here. Not while I am
in house. Make of it what you will, even though I am retired from what
passed for public service, I am still seen as a friend of the
government. I have the ear of every society power monger in the country.
The army knows well enough they cannot abuse you while I am a
witness--and they will not touch me. They daren't."

 She added, "I am Lady Glinda," in case some of the younger novices
hadn't cottoned on yet.

 "It isn't the girls that are wanted," said Sister Doctor. "It is the boys."

 "Don't underestimate what people in the throes of passion may do," said
the Superior Maunt. "Our rectitude means little to the world beyond our
walls, and the commitment of our lives is as cheap as throwaway grain on
unuseful margins of field. Still, Sister Doctor, you are right. The army
seeks two young men, but they do not know for sure that they are here."

 Liir said, "I do not think the broom would carry two, but Trism could
climb to the ramparts late at night, and fly to safety. That would leave
only me, and whatever fate I have earned, I should face it by myself."

 The room grew decidedly chilly. "So the rumors of the broom are true?"
said Sister Doctor. The Superior Maunt took in some breath wetly at the
corners of her mouth.

 Liir shrugged but couldn't deny it. From the side, mad Mother Yackle
called, "Of course the rumors are true. The broom came from this very
house. I myself gave it to Sister Saint Aelphaba years ago. Am I the
only one concentrating enough to know this?"

 She might, an hour earlier, have been hushed, and the Superior Maunt
began to speak. But Sister Doctor raised her hand and stayed the Mother
Maunt's comment, and remarked, "You've been quiet for a decade, Mother
Yackle, but of late you've come back to yourself somewhat. Have you
anything to add we should know?"

 "I don't talk when there's nothing to say," said Mother Yackle. "All I
have to add is this: Elphaba should be here to see this hour."

 "You have an uncommon association with--the Witch of the West."

 "Yes, I do," said Mother Yackle. "I seem to have been placed on the
sidelines of her life, as you might say, as a witness. I'm mad as a
bedbug, so no one needs to attend, but I've taken some measure of her
power. Oh!--but sheshould be here to see this hour."

 "Mother Yackle? A guardian angel?" called Sister Apothecaire.

 "Well--a guardian twitch, anyway," replied the old woman.

 Liir trembled and thought of his lack of power, once again, and of his
revery within these walls. Now he remembered what he hadn't seen before:
that in the corner of the room where the green-skinned novice had sat
rocking the cradle, a broom leaned against a chest of drawers.

 "Are there other remarks?" asked Sister Doctor.

 Shocked somewhat by the developments, the maunts muttered quietly, but
no one else spoke until Sister Apothecaire stood and said, "Mother
Maunt, I would like to applaud you for your courage and your wisdom."

 Tears ran suddenly from the old maunt's eyes as her house, to a person,
stood and paid their respects. Outside, the horses shied and the men
started at the sudden rain of noise from the chapel windows.

 

 THE BROOM, THOUGH,wouldn't carry Trism. In his hands it was no more
than a broom. "I lack the proper spunk, it seems," he said.

 "Maybe it has lost its power," said Liir, but in his own hand the thing
leaped to life again, bucking like a colt.

 "We might be able to manage a sleight of hand with only one man to
hide," said Lady Glinda. "After all, as you pointed out, they are
looking for a pair of you. Perhaps Trism could be passed off as my
bodyguard. It was unlike me to have ventured here without a bodyguard,
after all, though I did. Sometimes I like to confound even myself," she
explained. "It isn't difficult."

 "If the men who hold us under siege recognize Trism from the barracks
at the Emerald City, he will be put under arrest," said Sister Doctor.

 "Well, I used to be good at makeovers," said Glinda. "And I could do
magic with a blush brush. He's got big shoulders for a maunt, but he's
pretty enough, and a little peroxide on the facial hair, which is so
conveniently blond--" She tossed her own curls. "Well, I never travel
without it."

 "I think not," said Trism in a steely voice.

 "Then we'll have to take the chance we can pass you off as my servant,"
said Lady Glinda. "Liir will leave tonight, on the broom, and tomorrow
morning I shall ride out with Trism at my side, and make no explanation.
If you choose then to open your doors to the soldiers, they will find
nothing untoward here. I shall wait outside your gate as an obvious
witness until their search is completed. If they are that hungry for
blood, they will not dally here but rush on elsewhere."

 "But where will you go?" the Superior Maunt asked Trism. By now they
had retired to her office, and she was sagging against the worn leather
of her chair.

 Liir looked at Trism. As much as could pass between them in a look,
without words, passed: and another moment of possibility crashed and burned.

 "If Trism can get through, he should try to find Apple Press Farm,"
said Liir. "He might smuggle Candle to safety elsewhere. The Emperor's
soldiers are headed vaguely in that direction, and the site has been
discovered and ripped up by thugs and vandals at least once already. It
seems to have been used as a clandestine press for the printing of
antigovernment propaganda."

 "Yes," said the Superior Maunt modestly, "so I've been told."

 "For you, I would try to find that farm," said Trism. "And I will take
the scraped faces, that they not be found here when the army does its
ransack."

 "As for me," continued Liir, "I've learned something from you." He
looked at the Superior Maunt, who was tending to nod. "I promised to try
to complete an exercise, and I did this much: I helped rid the skies of
the dragons that were attacking travelers and causing fear and suspicion
among the outlying tribes. I will finish my work before anything else
happens. I should let the Conference of the Birds know that, for now,
they are free to gather, to fly, to conduct their lives without that
undue threat. With the help of the Witch's broom, and unimpeded by
dragon-fings, I can manage that shortly.

 "Beyond that," he said, "I have other scores to settle. I set out years
ago to find Nor, a girl with whom I spent some childhood years."

 "But, Liir," said Sister Doctor, "the Princess Nastoya is expecting
your return."

 Liir started. "I had assumed she'd have died long ago."

 "She's been trying to die, and trying not to die, a complicated set of
intentions," said Sister Doctor. "She mentioned you, Liir."

 "I don't know what I can do for her. I do not have Elphaba's skills,
neither by inheritance nor by training."

 They sat silently as he worried it out. "In the choice of what to do
next, I'm troubled. On the one hand, you say the Princess Nastoya is old
and suffering and wants to die."

 "Yes," said the Superior Maunt wearily. "I know the feeling."

 "On the other hand, Nor is young and has a life ahead of her, and
perhaps it is a greater good to help her first, if I can."

 They waited; the wind soughed a little in the chimney.

 "I will return to Princess Nastoya," he told them. "I know I won't be
able to help her to sever her human disguise from her Elephant nature.
I'm not a person of talents. But if I can give her the loyalty of
friendship, I'll do that."

 "You would help an ancient crone over a disappeared girl?" said Sister
Doctor. Her sense of medical ethics flared.

 "Young Nor found her own way out of Southstairs," said Liir. "Whatever
else has been done to her body or her mind, she clearly has spirit and
cunning. I shall have to trust that her youth will continue to protect
her. And maybe she doesn't need my help now--though I won't rest until I
know it for sure. Meanwhile, Sister Doctor, you say that the Princess
Nastoya has asked for me. Ten years ago I made a promise to try to help;
I owe her my apologies if nothing else. And if I can report conclusively
to the Scrow that it was not the Yunamata who were scraping the faces of
solitary travelers, I may be able to help effect a treaty of faith
between the two peoples."

 "Is it hubris to aim for such a large reward?" asked Sister Doctor.

 "No," said the Superior Maunt, her eyes now closed.

 "No," said Liir. "The Superior Maunt has shown me that tonight. If we
share what we know, we may have a fighting chance. This house, as a
sanctuary, may survive. The country, and its peoples, may survive."

 "The country," said the Superior Maunt. Her mind was sliding sleepward.
"Oh, indeed yes, the country of the Unnamed God... 
 "The country of Oz, be what it may," said Liir.

 In a semblance of a toast to hope, they raised imaginary glasses of
champagne, as the Superior Maunt began to snore.

 

 SOMETIME LATER THAN MIDNIGHT,Sister Apothecaire showed Liir and Trism
to an attic. A window gave out conveniently to a place where two
matching peaks of roof on either side sloped together to form a valley
between them. Corbelling protected this section of roof from the view of
people on the ground.

 Sister Apothecaire said, "Sister Doctor mentioned your intentions to
me, Liir. I'm glad to have the chance to add what Sister Doctor forgot
about. The Princess gave us a message to give you--but of course you had
disappeared by the time we got back. She said something about Nor and
the word on the street about her. I don't recall precisely, but she has
something to say to you."

 Liir reached inside the Witch's cape. In the interior pocket, he felt
for the folded-up drawing of Nor by her father. He winced at the memory
of the childish writing--the chunky downstrokes, the blocky uncials.Nor
by Fiyero .

 Sister Apothecaire wrapped Liir's cape the more tightly around his
chest to make sure it wouldn't flap and draw undue attention as he tried
to make his escape. She tucked extra loaves of bread and a parcel of
nuts into his lapels, and bade him Ozspeed. Then she retreated to give
them privacy for their good-byes.

 "Neither of us may make it, you know," said Trism. "Before noon
tomorrow we may both be dead."

 "It's been good to be alive, then," said Liir. "I mean, after a fashion."

 "I'm afraid I got you into this," said Trism. "I saw you on the ball
pitch and thought I would take my revenge on you. I didn't mean this
much revenge--either that you should die, or that we should part like this."

 "I was looking for you, too, sort of--you just saw me first," Liir
answered. "It might have been the other way round. Anyway, what does it
matter? Here we are. Together a moment longer, anyway."

 After a while, Trism managed to say, "Are you sure you can fly in this
condition?"

 "What condition is that? I've been in this condition my whole life,"
Liir answered. "It's the only condition I know. Bitter love, loneliness,
contempt for corruption, blind hope. It's where I live. A permanent
state of bereavement. This is nothing new."

 They kissed each other a final time, and Liir mounted the broom of the
Wicked Witch of the West, and felt it rise beneath him. He did not look
back at where Trism stood. He had few talents, did Liir, and while
flying a broom was one of them, he wasn't practiced enough to risk
breaking his neck.

 His other talent, though, was a distillation of memory into something
rich and urgent. He guessed, in the hours or years remaining to him, he
would remember the effect of Trism clearly, without corruption, as a
secret pulse held in a pocket somewhere behind the heart.

 The exact look of Trism, though, the scent and heft of him, the feel of
him, would probably decay into imprecision, a shadowy form, unseen but
imagined. Hardly distinguishable from an extra chimney in a valley
formed by pantiled roofs of a mauntery.

_ The Eye of the Witch_

 1

 FLYING AT NIGHT.

 He kept low at first, scarcely twice the height of the highest trees.
The winds tunneling beneath the cloud cover were ill-tempered, as if out
to tumble him. Below, the oakhair forest twitched in the winter gale,
looking like the pelt of a great beast lumbering along for midnight
rendezvous with sex or supper.

 Then the clouds thinned, and the air grew colder still. He remembered
more of the attack by dragons than he wanted to--it kicked up a sick
feeling. He couldn't manage much more height than he'd achieved so far.
Still, with a quick flip of his head left, right, he could make out the
southernmost cove of Kellswater and the bay where the Vinkus River
debouched into Restwater. From this vantage both lakes looked hard and
dead as slate.

 He crossed the dark line drawn by the Vinkus River. Now he was halfway
to Kumbricia's Pass, which meant that Apple Press Farm was somewhere
below. How was Candle faring? He thought of pulling down and seeing.

 You could, he said to himself. Now you needn't worry about scaring her,
for if you show up in the middle of the night, she'll be ready: she'll
have divined the present and sensed your approach, and prepared the tea
for your arrival. And the blankets, and the fire, and the bed, though
you're not ready yet to go to her bed again, even chastely.

 But no, no, he continued--no. What if she was with someone else? Or what
if she'd left? Or what if Commander Cherrystone recognized Trism and
arrested him, and tortured him into revealing Liir's hiding place--and
thence discovered Candle? And kidnappedher--as he had done Nor all those
years ago!--as a kind of reprisal against the slaughter of the dragon
contingent, the ruin of the basilica?

 Liir was learning to think in terms of consequence. He gave due credit
to the strategies and devices of the Emperor. In any case, though,
concern for Candle would distract Liir from completing his mission, as
he had promised her to do. Let Trism get there safely and see to her
needs, if he could, if he would. Time enough for me to show my sorry
face and find out what's going to happen next.

 For now, he would finish what he'd started: at least this much.

 He might have caught sight of the farmhouse roof winking, or he might
be miles and miles off. He didn't know, and it didn't matter. He kept
his eyes trained on the foothills of the Great Kells, which from this
height were already beginning to swell, less an actual shape than a
shift in the grade of shadow.

 The wind strengthened as it rushed down the eastern slopes of Oz's
mountainy spine. He lost speed, and it took more effort to keep the
broom on course. Like riding a horse in a raging river, he imagined, now
that he had some experience of horseback riding under his belt, as it
were. Finally he had to come down to earth entirely, from exhaustion. He
found a shepherd's summer lean-to, abandoned for the season, and
stretched out underneath the cape and fell promptly asleep, the broom
between his arms and along his chin like the boniest of lovers.

 2

 AT DAWN, THE WINDS RELENTED,and the mountains burned in pinkish light.
He finished the small meal provided by Sister Apothecaire and pressed on.

 Kumbricia's Pass was defined by a color of evergreen specific to the
suspended gorge that widened apronlike as it dropped toward the Vinkus
River plain. How foreboding the uprights of the cliffs on either
side--how much more fortress the landscape provided than Liir had been
aware. No wonder the Yunamata, the Scrow, and the Arjiki had never
knuckled under to the industrial strength of Gillikin or the military
might of the Emerald City. And no wonder the dragons had been an
important development--they would have had to work to flap their way
along this wind-chased passage, but they would have managed. If the
dragon population had expanded, and a whole fleet of them had become
available for maneuvers, they could have rained destruction even upon
the distant populations of the widespread Vinkus.

 And might yet, Liir knew. The strategic knowledge that had developed
those dragons into weapons wouldn't have been lost because Trism
defected or the basilica collapsed. If nothing else happened, it was
only a matter of time before another Trism came along to do the bidding
of his superiors and raise up perhaps an even mightier army.

 Yet today had dawned, and tomorrow could not be foreseen. No magician
in the world had yet mastered the art of prophecy, so far as Liir knew.
Not a single venerable bishop with his channels to the divine, nor any
tiktok mechanism of subtle apprehension, nor even the best-taught
sorcerer with the keenest of inner eyes, had ever accurately foretold so
much as whether the rain would hold off for the picnic. It was Time Yet
to Come that possessed the strongest force of all, a magic mightier than
the Kells themselves, a magic greener than all of green Oz. Inscrutable,
terrifying, and exhilarating at once.

 

 HE FOUND HE COULD NOT FLYabove Kumbricia's Pass. His broom bucked to
one side or another, as he'd heard a horse instructed to cross a risky
bridge might do. He didn't know whether this was mere exhaustion, a
flagging of his will, or some sort of wizardic or magnetic obstruction
he didn't understand. He allowed himself to drop, by a series of long,
scalloped declines, till at last he found landfall in a clearing, and
continued his voyage by foot.

 It took time to locate the spot where he had been interviewed by
General Kynot, the crusty old Cliff Eagle--the island in the hanging
tarn. The place seemed deserted. He could see nothing but random
feathers and the inevitable mess of droppings. Maybe they'd moved on to
a cleaner lobby somewhere.

 On foot he continued west, losing track of time. One of the drawbacks
of flying on the broom was that his nose became frozen, and the air at a
certain height, while clean of grit, was also curiously scentless.
Kumbricia's Pass, by contrast, was a festival of odors.

 In the nest of the cape, he settled for an afternoon nap and didn't
wake up until dawn... d he wasn’t'even sure it was dawn of the next day,
or some day further on.

 Nonetheless, he was rested at last, rested in a deep way, and better
able to spy winter berries in the thickets, and chichonga pods, and the
occasional scatter of walnuts on the ground. Dozens of streams leapt
from either side of the great gorge and crisscrossed, occasionally
islanding the floor of the pass into hillocks. He didn't go thirsty. He
felt that the longer he pressed on, the stronger he became.

 At last Kumbricia's Pass made its final abrupt turn before opening out
above the beautiful bleak expanse, as far as the eye could see, of the
rolling prairie known as the Thousand Year Grasslands. In the shallow
caves and along the ledges of the westward face of the Kells, nearly
deafened by the constant wind, Liir met up with what remained of the
Conference of the Birds.

 Their numbers had dwindled in the short time since Liir had left
Kumbricia's Pass. When General Kynot spied Liir standing there--so much
for the vigilance of their sentries!--he lop-winged over and indicated,
with a strict jerk of his head, that they should retreat into the gorge
for a bit of a chin-wag.

 A few Birds saw the General's intentions, and braved the buffeting
winds to join the colloquy. Several dozen gathered, including the Wren
named Dosey, who cued in the blind, hobbledy Heron.

 "We see you've reclaimed your broom," began the General without
formality. "I'm to understand it is not functioning as a vehicle for
flight anymore, or you wouldn't have come on foot. And you would have
come sooner."

 "I came as quickly as I could," said Liir. "What's happened?"

 "We've lost half our number," said the General, "or near to it. The
Yunamata rushed us, and since we were scared to take high wing, we were
caught in a series of nets and traps they'd erected across a narrow part
of the Pass. Scarcely a one of us hasn't lost companion or kin."

 "That's not like them," said Liir. "Or not like their reputation.
They're a peaceable people."

 The General glared at Liir. "We've had to leave the Pass, lest it
happen again. We're cornered against the sky up here, on display to
preying dragons, and without adequate supply of grubs and worms."

 Liir said, "I'm sorry about the Yunamata attack. That's the Emperor's
strategy--to keep his foes busy nipping at one another. That has to stop.
There's no way to survive without our making peace among ourselves."

 "Begging your pardon, sir," shrilled the Wren to Liir, and the General
was too dispirited to bother correcting her terminology. "One population
can't make peace with another by force."

 "There are possibilities," said Liir. "The time of the dragons is done,
at least for now. You can fly again.We can fly again. And before the
next threat might come, we have to maneuver ourselves into... coalition.
No, not that: a nation."

 "Which nation is that?" snapped the General.

 "Witch nation!" tittered a Dodo. "I likes that, I do."

 "You called a Conference about the raiding skirmishes of dragons," Liir
reminded them. "The dragon fleet has been destroyed. But those dragons
were a tribe, too: ill-used, malevolent, raised up to strike out,
imprisoned by their training. It gave me no joy to poison a dragon, even
one that has attacked and killed your kind and mine. Yet the moment is
here to fly again. Not just home, not just yet: but fly into the storm.
The Emperor has already sent out a guard to hunt me down, and he and his
ilk will hardknuckle anyone who gets in his way. No one in the Emerald
City can stand up to him, for he claims the divine right of the
elect--not elected by people, but by the Unnamed God. Who can dispute
that? We are all elect, for here we are, and we must fly for our lives.
We must show ourselves to be a company. He sent dragons to scare the
skies: we will fly ourselves as a flag right back at him."

 General Kynot pretended to peck at his chest for vermin. When he raised
his head, his eyes were dry again. "It is not easy to trust the wisdom
of a human person," he admitted. "Like so many humans, you could be
lying. Leading us into a trap. Promising us freedom, and tricking us
into an ambush of yet more dragons. Yet we have so few choices but to
trust. After all, you are the son of the Witch."

 "Don't base your decision on a false premise," said Liir. "I will never
know for sure who my parents were. And even if I did, the son of a witch
can be as wrong as anyone else. Let us fly because you are persuaded we
should, not because I say so."

 "I vote yes," said Dosey.

 "So do I," said the Heron, "though I can't fly anymore, of course."

 "I didn'tcall for a vote," said Kynot.

 "That's why I voted," Dosey replied.

 "Witch nation! Witch nation!" said the Dodo.

 

 THEY LAUNCHED AT NOON,maybe ninety Birds, swooping westward into the
buffeting winds that ran the span of the prairie to build up enough
strength to crash against the Kells.

 The venture almost scattered them at once. The Wrens tumbled like husks
of dried pinlobble; the Ducks shat themselves silly; the Night Rocs
couldn't see in the widest daylight Oz had to offer, and nearly brained
themselves by wheeling backward into the peaks.

 Liir was giddy and vertiginous. The broom shot out over a rocky sward,
so low that he could make out the surprised expressions of wild highland
goats. Another instant and he was fifteen times higher than the highest
tower of Kiamo Ko, and a silver river winked in the sunlight below him,
narrow as a bootlace.

 Just fighting to stay together took the better part of an afternoon.
When they finally reached air space beyond the forested foothills, above
the nearest start of the endless grassland, where the power of the wind
diminished, they settled to rest and feed and count their number. Four
of their ninety had been lost in the first descent out of Kumbricia's Pass.

 But there were grassland grubs and beetles, and the backwash of
mountain rills to splash in, so they made their first encampment.

 

 IT TOOK A FEW DAYSof rehearsal for the Night Rocs to learn how to
maneuver by daylight, but the Grasslands were forgiving. After hours of
uninhibited flight, with no dragons approaching, the Birds grew braver
and flew in a looser formation.

 For the time being they avoided other populations, though far below
them they delighted in the spectacle of wild tsebra wheeling and
cantering in their winter migration toward the south, a flurry of black
and white markings against the brown ground, an alphabet in the act of
writing the story of tsebra migration. Or notes, singing a mythic history.

 Draffes, their long tawny necks swaying, saluted them in their
high-pitched voices. Liir couldn't hear them, but Kynot said that
evening that sentient Draffes were living among draffes, in apparent
harmony.

 A small band of Vleckmarshes flew up to greet the flying Conference
(Kynot would not allow the Birds to call themselves Witch Nation,
despite the Dodo's pleading). At the sight of Liir on the broomstick,
the Vleckmarshes made common cause with the travelers, and flew alongside.

 Then a bounty of Angel Swans, who usually kept to themselves out of
pride for the whiteness of their mien, gave wing. So too a noisy clot of
Grey Geese, who were wintering together on the banks of a nameless broad
winter lake that appeared and disappeared in different places every
year, they said.

 The Conference flew in waves, the bigger birds working harder,
providing a breakfront against the wind, the smaller birds in the
slipstream, and lower, in case of attack by air. It was Dosey who
spotted the tents of the Scrow, arrayed in the usual geometric precision
against the trackless blanket of earth.

 Liir did not want to approach the camp, not yet. But General Kynot,
agreeing to serve as an emissary, dove out of formation and whipped
around the camp until he could decide which tent belonged to the
Princess Nastoya.

 That night, the Conference having settled under a shelter of windthorn
hedge, Kynot reported to Liir.

 "I found one who could speak to me, an old scholar named Shem Ottokos,"
said the General. "I told him you were abroad, but he said he didn't
need me to tell him that. He had been able to make you out with his
naked eye, because the cape unfurls so blackly against the scrim of the
evening. He had the tent lifted for his queen to see, and though she is
mostly blind now, she said she could make you out against the sky. He
thinks it was the clot of the Conference she was seeing, its whole mass.
She wants to see you, said Ottokos. She has something to tell you.
Whether you can help her or not."

 "If she agreed to meet me later, she can tell me then," said Liir. "Did
she?"

 "The Scrow rarely travel during this time of year, and they haven't
settled any peace with the Yunamata. Ottokos does not know if he can
convince the tribal elders to pull up camp and brave Kumbricia's Pass.
He doesn't know how to talk to his people about this. But I explained
about the extermination of the dragons. Perhaps Ottokos will be persuasive."

 "If Princess Nastoya still has time, we have time," said Liir. "It is
her time that we need to read, not ours."

 

 NORTHWARD, BEATING AGAINST THE ICY WINTERgusts known in some circles as
the Farts of Kumbricia; northward and northward, and the Thousand Year
Grasslands went white under drifts of frost. The snow was lipped and
patterned by the wind into shapes like the imbricated scales on a fish.
Now out of sight of the Kells, now back; now joined by a throng of Snow
Geese, five hundred strong, now by a mystic Pale Crane, her partner, and
her senile though quite energetic mother.

 At last, because the smaller Birds feared freezing to death, and the
food stock grew scarce, the Conference wheeled eastward. Kynot had a
notion that they could most safely cross the Kells again at the point
where the Arjikis had built their mountain villages. If nothing else,
there would be the chance of a barn in which to roost, or a bonfire
around which to warm themselves. It was rough work, though. Once more
suffering the churning of wind against the hard breast of the Kells, the
Conference sought a lower altitude, which took more time but afforded
quicker shelter should a storm come up.

 The weather was with them, at least. Day after day the sky was peerless
blue, if pinion-quaking cold. Under snow squalls or rain clouds the
Conference would have fumbled. But they always had the chance to move
on: this kept the smaller birds brave.

 They came at last to the highland valleys and white wastes of the
Arjiki stronghold of Kiamo Ko. Liir did not care to alight there, but
the nights were drawing in earlier and earlier, and he had no choice but
to see it as a blessing.

 His rump sore, and almost unable to uncurl his spine from the arched
position in which he flew, he landed on the cobbles of the courtyard
with 220 of the smaller Birds, while the larger ones waited formally
outside for an invitation. The monkeys shrieked, though whether it was
out of terror or welcome, Liir couldn't tell. Chistery met him at the
top of the steps to the main hall.

 "I suppose you've asked me, for old time's sake, to join you," he said.
"I'd come if I could. But I don't think my wings are up to it."

 "You can't have had news of our intentions," said Liir.

 "You're a message, that's all," said Chistery. "No one can watch you
raveling and unraveling up the columns of mountain air without knowing
you intend to be seen. I'll tell you, my heart was in my throat though,
as you came nearer. I thought to myself, It's Elphaba herself."

 "No, it's only me," said Liir. "How's Nanny?"

 "Past her prime. For the fourth decade in a row, I'd say. She's having
a sandwich of egg and dried garmot. Do you want to go up?"

 "I suppose I'd better. May we stay here?"

 "You needn't ask," said Chistery, slightly hurt. "Until someone else
comes to claim it, the house is yours."

 Nanny sat up in bed, looking gently at her bread crusts. When she saw
Liir, she smiled and patted the bedclothes. "Don't worry, I won't wet,"
she said. "I've already gone."

 "Do you know who I am?" asked Liir.

 "Ought I?" She didn't sound worried about it. "Is it Shell?"

 "Decidedly not."

 "Good. I didn't like Shell very much." She held out the pieces of
bread. "I saw the Birds coming, and I saved them something from my lunch."

 "That's nice of you."

 "Actually, the bread was a bit stale. But maybe they won't notice. It's
nice to see you again, whoever you are. Just like old times." She patted
his hand. "I never could tell what was going on then, either, but now I
don't mind so much."

 "Nanny?"

 "Hmmmm?" She was beginning to drift off to sleep.

 "Did you ever hear of someone named Yackle?"

 One eyelid of Nanny's cocked open. "Might have done," she said warily.
"Who wants to know?"

 "Only me."

 "Days a lifetime ago are clearer to me than today. I don't even know
what sex I am anymore, and I can remember what I got in my Lurlinemas
basket when I was ten. A tin cannikin full of colored beads--"

 "Nanny. Yackle."

 "I met someone named Yackle once," said Nanny. "I always remembered it
because her name reminded me of jackal. Like the jackal moon, you know."

 "Where?"

 "She had a little commercial enterprise, if you call it that, in the
Emerald City. The Lower Quarter, downslope of Southstairs, if you know
where that is."

 "I do."

 "I went in to have my tea leaves read and to ask a question about
Melena. Your grandmother."

 Liir didn't bother to correct her.

 "Yackle was an old crone without much time left, I'd guess. But she
still had talent. She gave me a few words of advice, read me the riot
act about my petty filching, and told me Elphaba would have a history.
Can you believe it!"

 "How did she know about Elphaba?"

 "Silly. I told her, of course. I told her Melena had given birth to a
green daughter. I bought whatever Yackle could provide as a corrective
agent to ensure the second child didn't come out green. And she didn't,
did Nessarose. Neither did Shell. Only our Elphie. A history! Can you
believe that?"

 "Must be a common name."

 "Yackle, you mean? Don't know about that. Never heard it again. Why do
you ask?"

 "Do you think Elphaba will have a history?"

 "She does already, ninnykins! I just saw her flying up the valley as
large as a cloud. Her cape went out behind her, a thousand bits in
flight. Nearly touched the peaks to the left and the right. If that's
not a history, what is?"

 

 CHISTERY SAW HIM OUT."You're welcome here anytime," he said. "This is
your house."

 "She always loved you best, you know," said Liir, grinning as he laced
the braces at the clasp of the Witch's cape.

 "Considering what she was like, is that a compliment or an insult?"
replied the Snow Monkey. "Fly well."

 

 BY THE TIME THEY NEAREDthe Emerald City, half a month later, the
Conference of the Birds was six thousand strong. They'd had to slow down
as they grew larger, for fear of midair accidents, but east of the Kells
the winds were less harsh. As the Conference crossed the Gillikin River,
coming into sight of the smart little villages and spruce knolls and
brick factories and millhouses of the rolling Gillikin tableland, its
shadow grew more definite by the day.

 Liir had no intention of attacking the Emerald City. The Birds were not
warriors, and the Conference, or Witch Nation, wasn't military in
makeup. Liir didn't want to see Shell, nor the Lady Glinda, assuming she
had returned to take up residence in her Mennipin Square town house for
the winter season.

 He only wanted that they should be seen.

 It was nearing evening when they approached the walls of the City from
the north. The sun was sagging against a few distant scraggly clouds,
heading pinkly for its rest, and then it disappeared behind the horizon.
The western sky would remain glassy bright for a half hour yet.

 As workers clocked off at the Palace, as the boulevards were thronged
with people heading for supper, and as the indigent went to their own
work of begging for coin against starvation, the Conference wheeled into
place. Anyone looking north at the display of Birds, from the inn called
Welcome Arms on the banks of the Gillikin, say, would read only cloud:
an invasion, a plague, a disaster. The same impression struck those
looking, from the northwest of the city, at the Birds swimming like an
ocean away from them.

 From the Emerald City, though, from every west-facing window of the
Palace, the intention was unmistakable. The Conference of Birds had
rehearsed to perfection. They flew in formation for viewing from the
east. They were the Witch, hat and cape, skirt and broom, shadowy face
tucked down against the wind, but beady-eyed bright. Liir, on his broom,
followed General Kynot, whose superior navigational system gave him his
location. Liir on his broom played the keen black eye of the Witch.

 Was Shell there, wondered Liir, knuckles on some marble windowsill,
Lord High Apostle Muscle himself, Shell Go-to-hell Thropp, First Spear,
Emperor of Oz, Personal Shell of the Unnamed God? Did he lean forward
and squint at the holy ghost of his remonstrating sister, and rub his eyes?

 Six thousand strong, they cried in unison, hoping that the echo of
their message would be heard in the darkest, most cloistered cell in
Southstairs as well as the highest office in the Palace of the Emperor.
"Elphaba lives! Elphaba lives! Elphaba lives!"

_ Raising Voices_

 1

 THE CONFERENCE HAD GROWNtoo large for a single speaker to address it.
On the morning it disbanded, therefore, two delegates from each species
met with General Kynot and his loose affiliation of ministers, which
included the Wren, the Dodo, and the most aggrandizing of the Grey
Geese, a gander who had appointed himself.

 Liir was invited, too. He asked the birds to keep an eye out for Nor.
"You go everywhere, you see everything," he said.

 "We stay clear of humans when we can," replied the Grey Goose, "present
company accepted. Pro tem."

 "It's probably futile," Liir agreed. "Still." He walked about with the
drawing ofNor by Fiyero . "She used to look like this. She's older by
now, of course."

 "All people look alike to me," murmured a Vleckmarsh.

 "She's simply beautiful," said the blind Heron.

 "Well, thanks just the same," said Liir, tucking the paper away.

 The General gave a rambling address that confused everyone, including
himself. "To conclude," he conceded, "we go on to new work. The Birds
run a risk of reverting to behaviors less than helpful. Now, I don't
mean to besmirch the fine Ostriches from the Sour Sands, who because
they don't fly were not part of our Conference. But we all know what
Ostriches are rumored to do when faced with a crisis. We must not
retreat into our claques and clans. Wary of human settlements--yes, who
wouldn't be? Let's not be stupid about humans. But wary of one another?
A little less so, if we can manage."

 "And a little more chatter amongst us," added Dosey the Wren. "In ways
we are only beginning to understand, we are the eyes of Oz."

 "When can Witch Nation have a reunion?" asked the Dodo. "This was fun."

 "The boy-broomist must go and make his own nest. And I?--off and away to
my family," said the General. "The wife, you know, and there was a new
clutch of eggs last spring. But there are the families of those Birds
who were heinously trapped and slain by the Yunamata. Those families
should be contacted, if we can figure out how."

 "I'll take care of that, sir," said Dosey.

 "You take care of yourself, missie."

 "Should this be an annual event?" asked the Dodo. "Ought I be taking
notes? I mean mental notes, at least?" But the General had lifted
himself onto the hump of a sudden, warmer breeze, and whatever he
answered over his shoulder could not be heard in the cheer that went up
to bid him good-bye.

 2

 LIIR DIDN'T ASK THEGREYGOOSEfor company, but the Goose followed along
behind. It was a problem. The Goose was too regal to be servile, and too
beautiful; he made Liir feel like a chimney sweep who hadn't seen a bath
in a month. The Goose called himself Iskinaary.

 They flew from the southern edge of the Emerald City and headed
straight out across Restwater, keeping east of the isthmus between the
lakes. If the mauntery of Saint Glinda had been torched, Liir didn't
want to know about it yet.

 Where the Vinkus River seeped along flat-bouldered steps into
Restwater, they stopped to get their breath, and they surprised a fox
out of a clump of wrestlebush. The fox dove at Iskinaary and wrenched
his wing, but Liir clobbered the fox with the broom, and the fox let go.
His wing drenched in blood, Iskinaary shed unashamed tears at his
disfigurement. Closer examination proved that the damage was, indeed,
slight. Nonetheless, if they were to proceed together, they'd need to go
on foot.

 "I don't mind a chance to give my legs some exercise," said Liir.

 "That's the most disingenuous thing I've ever heard," said Iskinaary.
"And it's not as if you have particularly handsome legs."

 "They walk faster than yours do, I've noticed."

 "If you want to walk faster, you'll have to carry me."

 Iskinaary was heavy to carry, and for all his beauty he still smelled
very much like a Goose. Still, Liir didn't mind that the trip would take
a little longer. So much had happened. A chance for reflection was welcome.

 He was returning now, having accomplished something at last--a set of
dragon murders, regrettable, but there you go. He was eager to know how
his accomplishment would fit in the house. What he and Candle would be
like together now. He had no experience of a happy return, ever. He
would hardly know what to say, where to smile. He hoped that not knowing
might seem wonderful.

 He knew more about human warmth, too, from Trism. How that knowledge
would translate in the presence of Candle was a puzzle to anticipate
with excitement.

 When they reached the Disappointments south of the Vinkus River, it was
sunset, and the cold dusk made them shiver. But there was evidence of
the tiny flower known as Shatter Ice--four little bluets in a nest of the
tiniest emerald leaves--which meant the hump of the winter had been
passed, and spring, however long it took to arrive, had started on its way.

 

 ISKINAARY'S WING HAD MENDEDa bit--not much--by the time they approached
the series of wooded knolls in which Apple Press Farm was hidden.

 "You're not planning on staying and becoming domesticated, I assume,"
said Liir. "I mean, it'd be fine to see you, umm, swanning about our
meadows, but I can't expect that would give you anything approaching
professional satisfaction."

 "I have my own ambitions," said Iskinaary. "I'm intelligent as well as
gorgeous, you know. Leave it to me."

 "To be more specific," said Liir gingerly, "I'm not necessarily
inviting you to take up residence with us permanently. No hard feelings."

 Iskinaary shrugged, as much as a Grey Goose could shrug. "Makes no
difference to me what you say," he replied. "I wasn't waiting for an
engraved invitation. I'll follow my own instincts. We Animals stillhave
instincts, you know."

 "Touché. And your instinct is?"

 "To keep my own counsel."

 They entered the woods, slopping through mushy hillocks of drifted
snow. "And, being instinct rich, Iskinaary, have you any opinion whatmy
instincts are?"

 "You're not untalented," said Iskinaary, overlooking the slight sarcasm
in Liir's tone. "You're even rather smart. For a human. You keep
excellent company."

 "Yourself."

 "Exactly. Furthermore, from what I've observed, you have a talent for
reading the past."

 "What does that mean?"

 Iskinaary honked. "What it sounds. There are very few who can read the
future. And you've mentioned this Candle of yours can read the present.
But reading the past is a skill in and of itself. It's not just knowing
the past. It's feeling it. It's deriving new strength and knowledge from
it--learning from it all the time. It's my own guess that this was
intended to be the great strength of human beings, when the Unnamed God
came up with the notion of you. Sadly, like so many good ideas, it
hasn't quite worked out in practice."

 "Thank you very much."

 "No insult intended."

 "I didn't know you believed in the Unnamed God."

 "I was speaking metaphorically. I assumed you'd get that. Is this the
place you're looking for?"

 It was. The low roofs of the dependences, and the main structure of the
house itself, and the big barn room in which the broken press presumably
still stood. Perhaps it could be made to work again.

 They came the long way around, to approach from the open meadow by the
front door. There they found that Liir's invitation had been accepted.
Nine tents were erected in the meadow, as perfectly aligned as the
casual ramble of the fences would allow. Eight subordinate tents made a
square, and the Princess Nastoya's tent stood centrally.

 With her canny ways, and for all the advance warning of this contingent
of Scrow, Candle ought to have known he was coming. Nonetheless, she
seemed surprised. Surprised, and flustered, large and slow, even redder
of face than her natural coloring suggested was possible. Perhaps blood
pressure problems? Or had she been experimenting with native rouges?

 He approached her cautiously--as if she were a young novice, not a farm
bride. He took her hands and held them, and found out that even now he
didn't know how he felt. "I've flown the world," he said.

 "Welcome home from the world." Her face was tucked down, as if she were
shy. A new shyness.

 "Candle," he said, "has the fellow called Trism come here?"

 She looked up at him from under a wrinkled brow. "He said you'd ask for
him. I couldn't be sure of him; he seemed a soldier of some sort. Well,
now you've asked, and right off. Though I'd have thought you'd enquire
if I was all right first! All these guests, and me in this state!"

 "Of course--of course. But I can see you're all right. And I don't know
if Trism survived."

 "Well, he did," she said, summarily. "Oh, Liir," she continued, her
voice now sounding as if he'd only been gone an hour, and she'd missed
him for sixty full minutes, "look what's happened, and I wanted to greet
you on our own." She spread her hands at the meadow.

 "I know," he said. "I invited them."

 "I'm glad you finally arrived to greet them, then. They've been here a
week, and my careful larder is just about bare. The one older fellow
speaks a rude sort of Qua'ati, but I can't make out a thing from the
others."

 The Scrow were trying to brew a kind of tea out of the bark of apple
trees and such sap as was running in the maples. They wrinkled their
noses at it and hardly seemed to notice Liir's arrival.

 "In the family way, I note," said Iskinaary pointedly, slipping into
Qua'ati effortlessly, "or are you just big-boned, my dear?"

 Indicating the Goose, Liir said to Candle, "This is my... He paused; the
wordfriend seemed inappropriate.

 "Familiar," supplied the Goose.

 "Oh, please!" said Liir. "Isthat what you're on about?"

 "Don't mind me, I'll just settle here with the stupid hens," snapped
Iskinaary.

 "I'm not a witch, nothing near!" said Liir. "You're going on the
grossest sort of hearsay."

 "Get on with your task, and I'll be the judge," said the Goose. He
shifted about three inches to one side and turned elegantly still, which
gave him the effect of being statuesque while allowing him to eavesdrop
with impunity.

 Liir picked up Candle's hands again. He wanted more from her, he willed
it so. She let him thumb her palms for a moment, then she pulled her own
hands away.

 "So Trism got here unharmed?" he said.

 "The dragon master? He did," she said, her face turned away again.

 "Where is he?"

 "He couldn't stay."

 Cautious. Gentle step, here. "Why not? Candle?"

 She began to lift a huge urn of water from the table in the yard; he
took it from her.

 "Candle. What happened? Was he all right?" Suddenly Liir had no trust:
not in his own apprehensions of Trism, nor of Trism... r even of Candle.
Trism, after all, had once wanted to kill him. "Did he treat you poorly?"

 "This water needs taking out to the Princess," she answered. "She's
being laved round the clock. I've been preparing it with essence of
vinegar, as that priestly prince instructed me to do."

 "What happened? What passed between you and Trism? Candle!"

 "Liir. What could pass between us? He didn't speak Qua'ati. And I could
understand what he chose to tell me, but not answer him--I don't speak
that bossy a tongue. I have a small voice, a half-voice. As you know."

 In succession, Liir thought a half dozen crises. She knows I loved him.
That I love him. That he loves me? That he loves her?

 That she loves him?

 What was this verblove anyway, that could work in any direction?

 Did he hurt her?

 "Candle. I beg of you."

 "Don't beg," intoned Iskinaary, standing on one foot. "Remember General
Kynot. Don't beg. Never beg."

 "We'll talk later," she said. "Now, if you'd take that water to your
guest? And then you'd better do what you came here to do."

 "I came here to be here! With you."

 "And this band of ragamuffins who preceded you? They are, what? The
relatives?"

 Tears pricked his eyes. "Don't be preposterous, and don't be mean! I've
been away, Candle. Doing what you asked. Getting something done.
Anything. Learning where I wanted to be."

 "I have my bad moments," she admitted, wiping her own face. "It hasn't
been easy. Let's not talk. Go straight to work, and help that old sow if
you can."

 "She's an Elephant."

 "Whatever the beast she is."

 "Candle!"

 "I didn't mean it like that. Liir, you startled me. Carrying this child
is hard work. I haven't been myself."

 He could see that.

 "Did Trism leave parcels for me?"

 "Two packets in the press, hanging on strings from the ceiling, to keep
the mice from them. The mice are very interested. Are you going to haul
this water to the invalid, or shall I? I have other work to do now.
Washing. The old woman runs through a dozen towels a day."

 She picked up a basket of wet laundry and wobbled outside to an old
apple tree, where she began to sling the clothes on drooping branches to
dry. She's hurting, he thought: even I, dull as I am, can see that. But
from what? My long absence? My affection for Trism? Or is the child
inside her making her sick, draining her blood, eating her liver from
within, kicking her pelvis sore with its ready heels?

 3

 HE WASN'T UP TO DEALINGwith Princess Nastoya yet, and the Scrow seemed
to have settled in nicely. Hell, she'd been dying for a decade, she
could die some more for another ten minutes before he finally had his
reunion with her.

 Stung by Candle's reticence, he wandered into the barn to retrieve the
parcels. If Trism had gotten them here safely, then he must have managed
to elude Commander Cherrystone. Glinda's glamour had worked once again,
and riding at her side as her factotum, Trism had played the shadowy
manservant, a known quantity. He'd been smuggled out of the mauntery safely.

 But what had happened here? Had he followed Liir's directions and found
Candle in residence, beautiful and reticent and large with child? Had
Trism resented the notion of a Candle? Had he been stung by the fact
that Liir had never mentioned her pregnancy? Had he assumed Liir was the
father?

 Had Trism been cruel to her?

 Liir took down the parcels, struck by the thought that the workings of
the human heart could be as various and imperturbable as the workings of
human communities. He didn't know enough of love in all its forms to
compare, to choose, to sacrifice, to regret. Held in Trism's soldier
arms, he'd been strengthened; held in Candle's loving regard, he'd been
strengthened, too. Now the only thing holding him was Elphaba's cape.
Was her mantle of penitential solitude to be his, too?

 He wiped his eyes and opened the parcels. In the slanting light through
the barn door, he wheeled out the hoops of face. Now that he knew what
they were, they seemed less grotesque--no less terrible than a drawing or
a dream of someone. A flat disc not unlike a mirror. They'd had lives,
these people, as puzzling as his. No one would ever know what those
lives were like, though.

 "Well," said Iskinaary, who'd followed him in, "as I live and breathe.
Is this what they mean by a human shield?"

 "They're the faces of the dead."

 "You're in here studying them, when you have a dying woman out there in
a tent, waiting for your attention?" Iskinaary was incensed.

 Liir looked at them, shaking his head. From the distance he heard the
first few notes of a melody. Candle had taken down the domingon again.
Whom was she calling with it? The baby within her? Come out, come out?
Or Liir himself, stuck in his indecision, his confusion?

 "I'm quite an expert at music, as I have perfect pitch. Unusual in a
Goose," said Iskinaary. "She's got a way with that instrument. She could
play the eggs right out of a mama Goose."

 "I heard her encourage the yard animals to sing," said Liir. "I mean
really sing, not just bray and cackle."

 "Singing lightens the load," said Iskinaary, who looked about ready to
deliver an aria himself. He cleared his throat. But Liir suddenly
snatched up the hoops from the ground and turned on his heel.

 "If she can be persuaded," he said, "maybe she can help the load
lighten. She's so weighed down herself--but she's a kind person. What a
good idea!"

 "Thank you," said Iskinaary, his feathers ruffled. Denied an audience,
he hummed to himself in a desultory fashion, but shortly thereafter he
followed Liir to find out what his good idea had been.

 

 LIIR INTRODUCED HIMSELFto the man called Lord Ottokos.

 "We've met before," said Shem Ottokos, "though since then, you've grown
up and I've grown old."

 Liir explained what he hoped Candle might do. If she would.

 Shem Ottokos seemed to find nothing peculiar in the proposal. "Your
wife is very kind, even in her heavy condition, and your husband seemed
equally kind."

 "She is not my wife, and I have no husband," said Liir. "Indeed, I have
no talent except the idea for this. And I do not know if it will work."

 "I will tell the Princess Nastoya that you have arrived," said Ottokos.
"She is in grave distress, and it is hard for her to talk anymore. But I
believe she is still able to hear and understand. I must believe this:
it is my job."

 Liir took the scraped and treated faces of the dragons' victims into
the orchard, faintly budding already, though the ground was still wet
with old snow. He hooked the thirteen hoops upon notches of apple tree
branch, as near to body height as he could guess each one had required
when attached to a living body. The damp sheets and toweling fluttered
like liquidy limbs beneath.

 4

 SHE PUT ASIDEher domingon when he approached and asked her for her
help. "Don't do it for me," said Liir. "Do it for her."

 "I'm already doing laundry for her," said Candle. "I have no more
strength."

 "You know people and you know kindness. Your music sang me back to
life. You have that skill. It's called knowing the present. You could
make the barnyard sing. I only ask that you know the present of Princess
Nastoya, and play her constituent parts to their own places."

 "You think like a witch. I am not a witch, Liir."

 "I am not a witch and I am not thinking like one. I am trying to learn
from history. I am trying to figure out what happened in the past, and
work to use that knowledge again. You played in my past, and brought me
my life. Perhaps you can play her death to her."

 "I don't feel well." She rubbed her eyes with her forefingers.
"Frankly, I haven't been sleeping. I don't know that this pregnancy is
going as it should, but there's no one to ask."

 "You don't feel as badly as Princess Nastoya does."

 "Liir!"

 He caught her at the elbow. "Tell me what happened!" he said roughly.
"Tell me what happened with Trism!"

 "Leave me be, Liir," she said, crying, but when he gripped her arm
harder, she said, "He told me to come away with him. He said whoever had
followed the two of you so far would not give up that easily. He said
the mauntery would be burned, and its members tortured until they
disclosed the whereabouts of this satellite operation. Oh, don't look at
me like that. Of course the maunts know about this place! Why else would
Mother Yackle have sent us here? Or the donkey know the way? Think, Liir!"

 "He told you to leave with him?"

 "He said I should go with him, for protection: that it is what you
would want me to do."

 Liir was stunned. "Why didn't you do it, then?"

 "I trusted you," she said, a little abrasively, "how do I know whether
to trust another soldier? He could have been abducting me to kill me and
my child. He could have been lying. He could have been doing it to hurt
you. Though now I see he meant more to you than I reckoned."

 What he heard mostly was her possessive pronoun:my child . Notours .

 "And he didn't stay," said Liir, in a voice nearly as small as hers.

 "No, he didn't," she answered. "Generally, people don't. They come,
they go. He left. The Scrow came. For all I know your Commander
Cherrystone will be here in time for tea, and Mother Yackle for the
washing up."

 5

 THESCROW RETINUEcarried the Princess into the orchard and set her down
on a blanket. She was grey; her legs had swollen like bolsters, her
scalp was nearly bald. She'd lost her eyebrows and her eyelashes, which
gave her sightless eyes a horrible eggy look. Her chin bristled with
enough hair to wipe farm boots clean.

 Liir could hardly put this collaboration of bones and muscles and foul
odors together with his childhood memories of meeting Nastoya the day or
two after Elphaba had died. He didn't try. The Princess was beyond
language, groaning and leaning into a screw of physical pain that seemed
to implicate the entire orchard. He could never apologize for having
abandoned his promise to her for so long. Neither could she speak
whatever message she'd had for him. It was too late now.

 Lord Ottokos retained his composure. He spoke to her about every shift
of limb and placement of pillow. Unsuccessfully he tried to dribble some
water into her mouth, but even at this late moment he was afraid he
might drown her before she could be divided from her disguise. She would
have to go to her death, if this worked, thirsty.

 She was prostrate on the ground, her head rolled back, giving her chin
some prominence for perhaps the first time in a decade.

 "We're ready," said Ottokos. He stood with a gnarled old staff, a bit
of sourwood into which iron thorns had been pounded. It looked like a
mace of some sort, a scepter, and Lord Ottokos was ready to assume the
leadership of the tribe.

 Liir nodded at Candle, who had come equipped with an old milking stool.
She sat down clumsily. Her legs went wide, but there wasn't enough lap
on which to hold her instrument. She had to balance it on an overturned
washtub. Still, she looked at Princess Nastoya with a complicated
expression, and presently she began to play.

 The others in the company had not been invited, but they lined the edge
of the orchard, knuckles locked, a Scrow position of reverence. The
Goose stood near Liir, a foot or two back, both deferential and
significant. It wasn't clear if he was Liir's familiar, or if Liir was
his interpreter.

 Candle began by dissecting chords and distending them into arpeggios.
She chose the lighter modalities at first, but quickly shifted into more
subtle variations. The Princess was uncomfortable on the ground, and her
blankets were already getting soaked in the snow.

 "To grow a death," murmured Liir, holding Candle's shoulders, "you must
plant a life."

 She shook him off. He began to walk the perimeter of the orchard,
trying to see from different angles. Was there something more he could
do? He should be doing? Candle was hard at work, and no doubt Princess
Nastoya was doing her own, but was more help needed, in this mission of
nothing but mercy?

 One stretch of the orchard. Another.

 "Liir," whispered Candle as he neared her. "I am very uncomfortable
here. It is not like six months ago. I can't keep this up for long."

 She rotated the instrument a quarter turn and splayed her fingers,
cocking them laterally, and she flat-struck the alto quarter, trying a
sprigged quadrille, a dance of spring.

 The third side of the orchard. Iskinaary wandered over as if at an
evening reception honoring the recent work of a well-regarded painter.
"You might try concentrating on the past," he said.

 "I don't know her past," said Liir. "I don't know a thing about it,
except that she knew Elphaba."

 "I don't mean her past," said Iskinaary. "She knows her own past well
enough, somewhere in there. I mean the others. Even in death, we are a
society, after all."

 Liir turned and looked at the Scrow, standing a distance away, but then
he saw what Iskinaary meant. It wasn't anything the living could do--it
was the human dead who were best equipped to call the human disguise off
Nastoya. They could beckon it forward, if Candle could play the scraped
faces to sing.

 But the playing was her talent, and the singing was theirs--it was his
job to listen. To witness their histories, and cherish them in memory,
his only talent. He had looked into the Witch's crystal ball, after all,
and had seen her past, even if it had nothing to do with him. He had
stumbled upon his own reveries without benefit of any gazing globe.
Maybe his only job was to listen. That much he could do.

 6

 IWAS THE FOURTH OF FIVE CHILDREN, and I loved the way sun warmed stone.
Just before lunch, on the flagstones of the terrace, I used to dance
barefoot with my mother for she loved it too.

 I was happy enough in my marriage, and happier still when I was
widowed, though happiness seems incidental to a good life.

 I never wanted to take the cane my father gave me, and I picked it up
and broke his nose with it, and he laughed so hard he fell into the well.

 I made things with colored threads, little birds and such.

 I always wanted to go to university at Shiz, as some of my friends
would do, but boys like me weren't allowed.

 I believed in the Unnamed God and accepted the mission set me because
God would take care of everything: the Emperor said so.

 I once took off all my clothes and rolled in a field of ferns, and had
an experience I never told anyone about.

 I was at the ceremony in Center Munch when the cyclone dropped the
house on Nessarose, and I saw it with my own eyes, but I lost my ribbon
on the way home.

 I loved how milk tastes, and the way hills go blue with cloud markings,
and my baby sister, her hair black as a beetle brush.

 I loved it when I was alive.

 I loved it when I was alive, too.

 Forget us, forget us all, it makes no difference now, but don't forget
that we loved it when we were alive.

 

 LIIR HEARD SOMETHINGfrom each hoop. Every face sang as Candle provided
accompaniment. The bud-notched trees shook with the force of their
voices, though there were no tongues, and little enough left of lips,
and no wind to pass through the aperture and turn their mouths into flutes.

 Reminded of human life, the corporeal part of Princess Nastoya melted
into the snow. All that was left of her human disguise shook off--a spin
of charcoal smoke, smudged in the air like incense. It stood, finding
its feet, before it dispersed, and the voices fell silent.

 There was nothing left on the blanket but a massive She-Elephant. The
Scrow all closed their eyes and began to weep. Her eyes opened and her
head rolled back. Her eyes met Liir's for an instant. Her neck snapped.

 No Place Like It

 

 AFTER AN HOUR,Lord Ottokos indicated that a surgeon should come forward
with a saw. The small bowl-stomached woman went to work at the
Elephant's right tusk and removed it in just a few minutes. Then she
sawed an inch of disc off the wider end. The tusk being hollow at the
wide end, the disc formed a ring with an aperture several fingers wide.
The surgeon fitted this on the point of the other end of the tusk, and
handed the relic to Ottokos.

 He bowed and accepted it. In turn he fastened it to the staff he had
prepared. When finished, the staff was a six-foot stake crowned by an
arched prong of Elephant tusk, an ivory smile without a face around it.

 "I will lead under the influence of Nastoya," he said in a quiet voice,
and this calmed the Scrow from their weeping.

 What influence is that, thought Liir; a shard of bone, a makeshift totem?

 That, and memory. Maybe all the influence needed.

 

 THESCROW HADlived so long under the leadership of Princess Nastoya that
they hardly knew what to do when she was gone. With effort, everyone
tugging at once, they managed to get her body onto the cart that had
brought Candle and Liir to Apple Press Farm. Then they began the long
trudge back to their tribal homeland. They would burn her on a pyre when
they arrived, and the scraped faces besides, and not a moment too soon.
Nastoya had never smelled very fine while alive, and now she was a
health hazard as well.

 Lord Ottokos insisted Liir should accompany them through Kumbricia's
Pass in case the Scrow delegation met up with the Yunamata, and trouble
flared. "It's the last thing you can do for Princess Nastoya, finishing
the task she asked of you back when the Witch first died," he said. "See
her bones to safety, anyway."

 Liir decided to leave the broom and the cape behind. He wouldn't fly
while in the company of the Scrow, and after departing from them, he
mightn't be able to fly back, anyway. Kumbricia's Pass had been
resistant to his flying above it.

 After packing the hooped faces alongside Nastoya's carcass, Liir bade
Candle and Iskinaary a quick good-bye. "Mind each other," he said.
"Iskinaary, keep watch."

 "I can watch over myself," said Candle. "You forget I can read the
present."

 "Can you read what is in my heart?" he asked. If so, tell me what it
is, he continued to himself. Tell me, so I can tell you back.

 Candle held his hands but wouldn't meet his eyes. Perhaps, the nearer
the baby was to birth, the more she despaired of ever having said it was
his. Would he ever be able to map any part of her mystery?

 He set out once more, with a sense that his life would be rich in
setting outs, and perhaps poorer in homecomings.

 

 THERE PROVED LITTLE DRAMAon the high ground. One evening the Yunamata
materialized out of nothing, naked as Birds, painted in tribal markings.
They approached the corpse of Princess Nastoya, carrying the lighted
roots of hagtooth bush that they used in their own funeral rites. They
sang, and melted away again in rather unseemly haste.

 At the final gorge, where the Conference of the Birds had departed for
its circuit around western Oz, Liir said a quick and perfunctory
good-bye to Lord Shem, Prince Ottokos, and turned home with a heavy heart.

 The accomplishments of the last six months had been irrelevant, he
decided, for all but Nastoya. Was that the only accomplishment that
mattered?--that somehow you not bungle your own death? Everything else
that had happened in his short adult life had been frothy and
meaningless, ultimately. Passionate, yes--yes, that, indeed. Passionately
felt, but without shapeliness or worthy outcome.

 The dragons were dead: some people were still walking about, ignorant
of how their tired lives might otherwise have ended up with a scraping.
That much was good. Stack that up against the cursed lives of those
Quadlings who daily had to remember their own dead, lost at the burning
of the bridge at Bengda. The bit of thatch falling, a letter in the air,
flaming and drowning.

 And doubtless there were still disconsolate prisoners in Southstairs,
and misguided soldiers in barracks, and those abject poor who had
survived the cleaning out of Dirt Boulevard. And that kid named Tip,
whose granny had probably sold him already for a better brand of cow, a
broom, a new pot for the hearth.

 To be sure, the airborne Conference of the Birds--a great show, if
nothing else. But what did it mean? Where did it get anyone? For all
Liir knew, that juvenile spectacle would give the Emperor better
leverage to draft additional soldiers, to tax for newer weapons, to
dictate for more control over the crown city of Oz. A flying witch made
out of birds! In another generation that would have been called pleasure
faithism: as if spectacle itself could convince one of anything.

 Yet the world was a spectacle, its own old argument for itself.
Endlessly expounded with every new articulation of leaf and limb, laugh
and lamb, loaf and loam. Surely there wassomething in the world lovely
enough to counter the dread of being alone, a solitary figure untroubled
by ambition, unfettered by talent, uncertain of a damn thing?

 The great force of evil? Shell, Emperor Quake-in-your-Boots, naming
himself the Spear of the Unnamed God? Or the next despot, or the one
after that?

 The colossal might of wickedness, he thought: how we love to locate it
massively elsewhere. But so much of it comes down to what each one of us
does between breakfast and bedtime.

 Remembering Princess Nastoya, he thought:Sever us from our disguises .
Then he flinched, almost in disgust: was that a prayer?

 How he wished the Elephant Princess had been able to deliver whatever
message that Sister Apothecaire had advertised she had for him. Another
slim hope dashed, so many slim hopes waiting to rise in its wake.

 A message about Nor, and the word on the street. Could Princess
Nastoya, with her massive ears, actually have learned Nor's whereabouts?
Surely she'd have found a way to tell him?

 Nor, lovely Nor, wherever she was. He didn't know where, he might never
know, except she was in his memory--like everyone else. There, and drawn
on the piece of paper secreted into the inner pocket of the Witch's
cape. He saw it in his mind's eye, clear as day, the drawing, the
coffee-colored wash suggesting the gleaming highlights of preadolescent,
perfect skin, the letters written in Nor's peculiar, crabbed printing.

 It was as if the burning letter had spelled something, suddenly, just
before it was quenched in black water. The thought came like a spasm,
and he harvested it before it disappeared. He unpacked the Princess
Nastoya's promised gift.

 The word on the street.Elphaba Lives!

 Nor's handwriting.

 

 WHEN HE GOT BACKto the farm a little after dusk, perhaps a week later,
he knew at once that it was deserted. One knows those things about an
old farmstead. Iskinaary was gone, and the donkey, and the hens had
scattered. For a minute he wondered if Trism had come back for Candle,
and now--angry at Liir for his quizzical ways, or herself taken with
handsome Trism--she'd changed her mind, and cast her lot with him.

 Or perhaps Trism's warning had been accurate, and Commander Cherrystone
and his band had found Apple Press Farm at last. Found a way to avenge
the slaughter of the dragons.

 It mattered, and would matter more tomorrow. For now, he was alone, as
before. As usual. It was a condition he'd need to get used to, or to
tolerate never getting used to--not exactly the same thing, more's the pity.

 He walked through the house. Her domingon was gone, which suggested
deliberation, but the dishes were unwiped, still crusty with porridge,
which suggested haste. Had she taken the broom? No, there it was, put up
on the mantelpiece out of harm's way.

 He built up a small fire in the kitchen to take the edge off the chill.
There was precious little with which to make a meal. As he stood trying
to think, though, he heard a barracking in the boggy land some way south
of the farm. Thrashing through underbrush, he found the goat hidden in
thickets, tied to a tree, sorely in need of milking, and cross as blazes.

 He led it back to the barn, and milked it in the shadows of the broken
press, glad he had learned one skill at least.

 Then, in the dark corner of the stair hall where they left the trash
for tipping into the dump beyond the orchard, he nearly tripped over the
Witch's cape. He picked it up to shake it out and hang it on a hook, and
the lump of dead matter rolled off the hem into the corner.

 Oh, oh oh oh. So this was it. The baby had come, come early, he
guessed; he didn't know all that much about the calendar as it pertained
to babies. It must have come too soon, and it had been dead on arrival,
or it had died at once. And Candle had been alone, poor thing--alone but
for that vainglorious Goose. How misguided that Liir should have felt
the need to honor the corpse of Nastoya and leave Candle to face a
possible childbirth or a stillbirth alone, with only a silly Goose to
hiss for help.

 He had hauled the dead carcass of an Elephant across the mountains on a
cart; he had tried to hear the testimonies of people who had had their
faces scraped. He had murdered dragons and people. He could bear to
touch the small corpse of a human child.

 So he picked it up. He held it at a distance. Tears started, though
why? He hadn't believed this was his child, and there was no new reason
to believe it now. It was just another child, just another inevitable
fatality, the next crude accident of the world, and not the last.

 He maneuvered its cold form closer. Cold, though not icy; this death
had to have just happened. Had the scraped faces sung the fetus to a
death, as they'd sung Princess Nastoya?

 Maybe the child had been born dead this very morning, as he was making
his approach. And a rosy morning it had been, the sun strengthening, and
the inane involuntary return of a green blush to the skin of the world.
He had even sung a bit of his own. Not his usual way!--he'd yodeled some
nonsense syllables, thinking: Maybe it will be all right. Maybe Candle.
Maybe Trism. Maybe something will work.

 The form was cold. Was it a normal infant size, or smaller? He didn't
know human infants. He nestled it against his neck, and thought he felt
its mouth move.

 Gingerly he stepped from the stair hall into the kitchen. Was it
warming up? Or was it just his own heat he felt, reflecting back at him?

 In the feeble light of the new fire, he moved it again, shifted it to
rest along his forearm. It was a pretty corpse, and now he could see it
had been a girl. Its umbilical cord was an unholy mess. Maybe Iskinaary
had helped to sever it. It didn't bear thinking about.

 The corpse twitched and cried, and stretched a little. He wrapped it
from stem to stern, forehead to toes, making sure its dab of a nose had
access to air. Then he carried it closer to the fire, in case corpses
liked to be a little warm before they were fed milk.

 Elphaba had kept a basket rocking at her feet, once: a basket was just
the thing. Was there an old onion basket somewhere in the keeping-room
belowstairs? He'd find a basket.

 He found a basket.

 He fed her by dripping goat's milk through a cheesecloth into her
pursing mouth. She took the false sucket well enough. She had Candle's
Quadling face, already: those beautiful rhomboids that made such
splendid cheekbones.

 Of course Candle would flee, if she'd given birth to a child and
thought it had died. Imagine the panic. Of course she would. Maybe she'd
go back to the mauntery, as the Superior Maunt had suspected she would.
At least for a time: to recover herself. What an ordeal she'd had. The
lonely pregnancy, the lonely delivery, and then--whatever it was that had
happened with Trism. And all of Liir's absences. Of course she would flee.

 She might come back. She might.

 He sat with the infant most of the night. For a while he spread out the
cape and even managed to sleep a little--he kept her in the basket,
though, so he wouldn't roll over onto her by accident and crush her.

 In the first black wash of dawn, he woke up comforted with a different
thought. Candle could see the present. Perhaps she'd known he was almost
home. What if she had fled--what if a guard of Commander Cherrystone's
battalion had indeed found the farm, and she'd led them away, diverted
their attention? Drawn them off scent? The mother bird pretends to have
a broken wing, to lead predators away from her nestlings in the grass.
Candle had as much instinct as a mother bird.

 So she knew that Liir would be back in time to rescue the girl, give it
a burial if needed, feed it if not. She'd hid the goat for him to find.

 She wasn't leading danger away from him, but from the baby. She could
take care of herself; they didn't want her, after all. But she was
relying on Liir to save her baby, whether he believed it was his or not.

 Imagining that, anyway, helped him open his eyes.

 There was heavy rain in the morning. The light was greyish and mossy
with the low clouds. He had to concede that the baby wasn't a corpse,
really. She was alive. Maybe she'd been born stone cold. But she was
alive now.

 Still smeared with her birth blood, and the watery beginning of her
little feces. He took her to the doorway and held her up in the warm
rain. She cleaned up green.

 

 A LITTLE PATIENCE, and we shall see the reign of

witches pass over, their spells dissolve, and the people,

recovering their true spirit, restore their government

to its true principles.

--Thomas Jefferson, 1798

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From Wicked

 THEY CONDUCTED THEIR LOVE AFFAIRin the room above the abandoned corn
echange as the autumn weather came lop-leggedly in from the east: now a
warm day, now a sunny one, now four days of cold winds and thin rain.

 ONE EVENING THROUGH THE SKYLIGHTthe full moon fell heavily on Elphaba
sleeping. Fiyero had awakened and gone to take a leak into the chamber
pot. Malky was stalking mice on the stairs. Coming back, Fiyero looked
at the form of his lover, more pearly than green tonight. He had brought
her a traditional Vinkus fringed silk scarf--roses on a black
background--and he had tied it around her waist, and from then on it was
a costume for lovemaking. Tonight in sleeping she had nudged it up, and
he admired the curve of her flank, the tender fraglity of her knee, the
bony ankle. There was a smell of perfume still in the air, and the
resiny, animal smell, and the smell of the mystical sea, and the sweet
cloaking smell of hair all riled up by sex. He sat by the side of the
bed and looked at her. Her pubic hair grew, almost more purple than
black, in small spangled curls, a different pattern than Sarima's. There
was an odd shadow near the groin--for a sleepy moment he wondered if some
of his blue diamonds had, in the heat of sex, been steamed onto her own
skin--or was it a scar?

 But she woke up just then, and in the moonlight covered herself with a
blanket. She smiled at him drowsily and called him "Yero, my hero," and
that melted his heart.

 

 MY MOTHERwas a westerne woman

And learned in gramarye

--K. Estmere, 1470,

collected inReliques of Ancient English Poetry, 1765

