A Series of Unfortunate Events
Book the Eighth
The Hostile Hospital
Lemony Snicket


CHAPTER ONE

There are two reasons why a writer would end a sentence with the word
"stop" written entirely in capital letters STOP. The first is if the
writer were writing a telegram, which is a coded message sent through
an electrical wire STOP. In a telegram, the word "stop" in all capital
letters is the code for the end of a sentence STOP. But there is
another reason why a writer would end a sentence with "stop" written
entirely in capital letters, and that is to warn readers that the book
they are reading is so utterly wretched that if they have begun
reading it, the best thing to do would be to stop STOP. This
particular book, for instance, describes an especially unhappy time in
the dreadful lives of Violet, Klaus, and Sunny Baudelaire, and if you
have any sense at all you will shut this book immediately, drag it up
a tall mountain, and throw it off the very top STOP. There is no
earthly reason why you should read even one more word about the
misfortune, treachery, and woe that are in store for the three
Baudelaire children, any more than you should run into the street and
throw yourself under the wheels of a bus STOP. This "stop"- ended
sentence is your very last chance to pretend the "STOP" warning is a
stop sign, and to stop the flood of despair that awaits you in this
book, the heart-stopping horror that begins in the very next sentence,
by obeying the "STOP" and stopping STOP.

The Baudelaire orphans stopped. It was early in the morning, and the
three children had been walking for hours across the flat and
unfamiliar landscape. They were thirsty, lost, and exhausted, which
are three good reasons to end a long walk, but they were also
frightened, desperate, and not far from people who wanted to hurt
them, which are three good reasons to continue. The siblings had
abandoned all conversation hours ago, saving every last bit of their
energy to put one foot in front of the other, but now they knew they
had to stop, if only for a moment, and talk about what to do next.

The children were standing in front of the Last Chance General
Store-the only building they had encountered since they began their
long and frantic nighttime walk. The outside of the store was covered
with faded posters advertising what was sold, and by the eerie light
of the half-moon, the Baudelaires could see that fresh limes, plastic
knives, canned meat, white envelopes, mango-flavored candy, red wine,
leather wallets, fashion magazines, goldfish bowls, sleeping bags,
roasted figs, cardboard boxes, controversial vitamins, and many other
things were available inside the store. Nowhere on the building,
however, was there a poster advertising help, which is really what the
Baudelaires needed.

"I think we should go inside," said Violet, taking a ribbon out of her
pocket to tie up her hair. Violet, the eldest Baudelaire, was probably
the finest fourteen-year-old inventor in the world, and she always
tied her hair up in a ribbon when she had to solve a problem, and
right now she was trying to invent a solution for the biggest problem
she and her siblings had ever faced. "Perhaps there's somebody in
there who can help us in some way."

"But perhaps there's somebody in there who has seen our pictures in
the newspaper," said Klaus, the middle Baudelaire, who had recently
spent his thirteenth birthday in a filthy jail cell.  Klaus had a real
knack for remembering nearly every word of nearly all of the thousands
of books he had read, and he frowned as he remembered something untrue
he had recently read about himself in the newspaper.  "If they read
The Daily Punctilio,"he continued, "perhaps they believe all those
terrible things about us. Then they won't help us at all."

"Agery!" Sunny said. Sunny was a baby, and as with most babies,
different parts of her were growing at different rates.  She had only
four teeth, for example, but each of them was as sharp as that of an
adult lion, and although she had recently learned to walk, Sunny was
still getting the hang of speaking in a way that all adults could
understand. Her siblings, however, knew at once that she meant "Well,
we can't keep on walking forever," and the two older Baudelaires
nodded in agreement.

"Sunny's right," Violet said. "It's called the Last Chance General
Store. That sounds like it's the only building for miles and miles. It
might be our only opportunity to get some help."

"And look," Klaus said, pointing to a poster taped in a high corner of
the building. "We can send a telegram inside. Maybe we can get some
help that way."

"Who would we send a telegram to?" Violet asked, and once again the
Baudelaires had to stop and think. If you are like most people, you
have an assortment of friends and family you can call upon in times of
trouble. For instance, if you woke up in the middle of the night and
saw a masked woman trying to crawl through your bedroom window, you
might call your mother or father to help you push her back out. If you
found yourself hopelessly lost in the middle of a strange city, you
might ask the police to give you a ride home. And if you were an
author locked in an Italian restaurant that was slowly filling up with
water, you might call upon your acquaintances in the locksmith, pasta,
and sponge businesses to come and rescue you. But the Baudelaire
children's trouble had begun with the news that their parents had been
killed in a terrible fire, so they could not call upon their mother or
father. The siblings could not call upon the police for assistance,
because the police were among the people who had been chasing them all
night long. And they could not call upon their acquaintances, because
so many of the children's acquaintances were unable to help them.
After the death of the Baudelaire parents, Violet, Klaus, and Sunny
had found themselves under the care of a variety of guardians. Some of
them had been cruel. Some of them had been murdered. And one of them
had been Count Olaf, a greedy and treacherous villain who was the real
reason they were all by themselves in the middle of the night,
standing in front of the Last Chance General Store, wondering who in
the world they could call upon for help.

"Poe," Sunny said finally. She was talking about Mr.  Poe, a banker
with a nasty cough, who was in charge of taking care of the children
following their parents' death. Mr. Poe had never been particularly
helpful, but he was not cruel, murdered, or Count Olaf, and those
seemed to be reasons enough to contact him.

"I guess we could try Mr. Poe," Klaus agreed. "The worst he could do
would be to say no."

"Or cough," Violet said with a small smile. Her siblings smiled back,
and the three children pushed open the rusty door and walked inside.

"Lou, is that you?" called out a voice, but the children could not see
who it belonged to. The inside of the Last Chance General Store was as
crowded as its outside, with every inch of space crammed full of
things for sale. There were shelves of canned asparagus and racks of
fountain pens, next to barrels of onions and crates full of peacock
feathers. There were cooking utensils nailed to the walls and
chandeliers hanging from the ceiling, and the floor was made out of
thousands of different kinds of tiles, each one stamped with a price
tag. "Are you delivering the morning paper?" the voice asked.

"No," Violet replied, as the Baudelaires tried to make their way
toward the person who was talking. With difficulty they stepped over a
carton of cat food and rounded a corner, only to find rows and rows of
fishnets blocking their way.

"I'm not surprised, Lou," the voice continued, as the siblings doubled
back past a stack of mirrors and a pile of socks and headed down an
aisle filled with pots of ivy and books of matches. "I usually don't
expect The Daily Punctilio until after the Volunteers Fighting Disease
arrive."

The children stopped looking for the source of the voice for a moment,
and looked at one another, thinking of their friends Duncan and
Isadora Quagmire. Duncan and Isadora were two triplets who, like the
Baudelaires, had lost their parents, along with their brother,
Quigley, in a terrible fire. The Quagmires had fallen into Olaf's
hands a couple of times and had only recently escaped, but the
Baudelaires did not know if they would see their friends ever again or
learn a secret that the triplets had discovered and written down in
their notebooks. The secret concerned the initials V.F.D., but the
only other clues that the Baudelaires had were a few pages from
Duncan's and Isadora's notebooks, and the three siblings had scarcely
found the time to look them over. Could Volunteers Fighting Disease
finally be the answer the children were searching for?

"No, we're not Lou," Violet called out. "We're three children, and we
need to send a telegram."

"A telegram?" called the voice, and as the children rounded another
corner they almost ran right into the man who was talking to them. He
was very short, shorter than both Violet and Klaus, and looked like he
hadn't slept or shaved in quite a long time.  He was wearing two
different shoes, each with a price tag, and several shirts and hats at
once. He was so covered in merchandise that he almost looked like part
of the store, except for his friendly smile and dirty fingernails.

"You're certainly not Lou," he said. "Lou is one chubby man, and you
are three skinny children. What are you doing around here so early?
It's dangerous around here, you know. I've heard that this morning's
Daily Punctiliohas a story about three murderers who are lurking
around this very neighborhood, but I haven't read it yet."

"Newspaper stories aren't always accurate," Klaus said nervously.

The shopkeeper frowned. "Nonsense," he said. "The Daily Punctilio
wouldn't print things that aren't true. If the newspaper says somebody
is a murderer, then they are a murderer and that's the end of it. Now,
you say you wanted to send a telegram?"

"Yes," Violet said. "To Mr. Poe at Mulctuary Money Management, in the
city."

"It will cost quite a bit of money to send a telegram all the way to
the city," the shopkeeper said, and the Baudelaires looked at one
another in dismay.

"We don't have any money with us," Klaus admitted.  "We're three
orphans, and the only money we have is being looked after by Mr. Poe.
Please, sir."

"Sos!" Sunny said.

"My sister means 'It's an emergency situation,'" Violet explained,
"and it is."

The shopkeeper looked at them for a moment, and then shrugged. "If
it's really an emergency situation," he said, "then I won't charge
you. I never charge anything for things if they're really important.
Volunteers Fighting Disease, for instance. Whenever they stop by, I
give them gasoline for free because they do such wonderful work."

"What exactly do they do?" Violet asked.


"They fight disease, of course," the shopkeeper replied. "V.F.D. stop
by here early each morning on their way to the hospital. Every day
they devote themselves to cheering up patients, and I don't have the
heart to charge them for anything."

"You're a very kind man," Klaus replied.

"Well, it's very kind of you to say so," the shopkeeper replied. "Now,
the device for sending telegrams is over there, next to all those
porcelain kittens. I'll help you."

"We can do it ourselves," Violet said. "I built one of those devices
myself when I was seven, so I know how to connect the electronic
circuit."

"And I've read two books about Morse code," Klaus said. "So I can
translate our message into electronic signals."

"Help!" Sunny said.

"What a talented group of children," the shopkeeper said with a smile.
"Well, I'll leave you three alone. I hope that this Mr. Poe person can
help you with your emergency situation."

"Thank you very much, sir," Violet said. "I hope so, too."

The shopkeeper gave the children a little wave and disappeared behind
a display of potato peelers, and the Baudelaires looked at one another
in excitement.

"Volunteers Fighting Disease?" Klaus whispered to Violet. "Do you
think we've finally found the real meaning of V.F.D.?"

"Jacques!" Sunny said.

Jacques did say something about working as a volunteer," Klaus agreed.
"If only we had a few moments to look over the pages from the Quagmire
notebooks. They're still in my pocket."

"First things first," Violet said. "Let's send the telegram to Mr.
Poe. If Lou delivers this morning's Daily Punctilio, the shopkeeper is
going to stop thinking we're a group of talented children and start
thinking we're murderers."

"You're right," Klaus said. "After Mr. Poe gets us out of this mess,
we'll have time to think about these other things."

"Trosslik," Sunny said. She meant something along the lines of, "You
mean if Mr. Poe gets us out of this mess," and her siblings nodded
grimly and went over to take a look at the telegram device. It was an
arrangement of dials, wires, and strange metal implements that I would
have been too scared to even touch, but the Baudelaires approached it
with confidence.

"I'm pretty sure we can operate this," Violet said.  "It looks fairly
simple. See, Klaus, you use these two metal strips to tap out the
message in Morse code, and I will connect the circuit over here.
Sunny, you stand here and put on these earphones to make sure you can
hear the signal being transmitted. Let's step to it."

The children stepped to it, a phrase which here means "took their
positions around the telegram device." Violet turned a dial, Sunny put
on her earphones, and Klaus wiped the lenses of his glasses so he
could be sure to see what he was doing. The siblings nodded at one
another, and Klaus began to speak out loud as he tapped out the
message in code.

"To: Mr. Poe at Mulctuary Money Management," Klaus said. "From:
Violet, Klaus, and Sunny Baudelaire. Please do not believe the story
about us printed in The Daily Punctilio STOP. Count Olaf is not really
dead, and we did not really murder him STOP."

"Arrete?" Sunny asked.

"'STOP' is the code for the end of a sentence," Klaus explained. "Now,
what should I say next?"

Soon after our arrival in the town of V.F.D. we were informed that
Count Olaf had been captured STOP," Violet dictated.  "Although the
arrested man had an eye tattooed on his ankle and one eyebrow instead
of two, he was not Count Olaf STOP. His name was Jacques Snicket
STOP."

"The next day he was found murdered, and Count Olaf arrived in town
along with his girlfriend, Esme' Squalor STOP," Klaus continued,
tapping away. "As part of his plan to steal the fortune our parents
left behind, Count Olaf disguised himself as a detective and convinced
the town of V.F.D. that we were the murderers STOP."

"Uckner," Sunny suggested, and Klaus translated what she said into
English, and then into Morse code: "Meanwhile we discovered where the
Quagmire triplets were being hidden, and helped them escape STOP. The
Quagmires managed to give us a few scraps of their notebooks so we
could try to learn the real meaning of V.F.D.  STOP."

"We have managed to flee from the citizens of the town, who want to
burn us at the stake for a murder that we did not commit STOP," Violet
said, and Klaus quickly tapped the sentence out into code before
adding two last sentences of his own.

"Please reply at once STOP. We are in grave danger STOP."

Klaus tapped out the last P in "STOP" and then looked at his sisters.
"We are in grave danger," he said again, although his hand did not
move on the device.

"You already sent that sentence," Violet said.

"I know," Klaus said quietly. "I wasn't putting it into the telegram
again. I was just saying it. We are in grave danger.  It's almost as
if I didn't realize how grave the danger was until I tapped it out
into a telegram."

'Ilimi," Sunny said, and took off her earphones so she could lay her
head on Klaus's shoulder.

"I'm scared, too," Violet admitted, patting her sister's shoulder.
"But I'm sure Mr. Poe will help us. We can't be expected to solve this
problem all by ourselves."

"But that's how we've solved every other problem," Klaus said, "ever
since the fire. Mr. Poe has never done anything except send us to one
disastrous home after another."

"He'll help us this time," Violet insisted, although she did not sound
very sure. "Just watch the device. He'll send back a telegram any
moment now."

"But what if he doesn't?" Klaus asked.

"Chonex," Sunny murmured, and wriggled closer to her siblings. She
meant something along the lines of "Then we're all alone," which is a
curious thing to say when you are with your two siblings, in the
middle of a store so stuffed with merchandise you can hardly move. But
as they sat closely together, looking at the telegram device, it did
not seem curious to the Baudelaires. They were surrounded by nylon
rope, floor wax, soup bowls, window curtains, wooden rocking horses,
top hats, fiber-optic cable, pink lipstick, dried apricots, magnifying
glasses, black umbrellas, slender paintbrushes, French horns, and each
other, but as the Baudelaire orphans sat and waited for a reply to
their telegram, they only felt more and more alone.


CHAPTER TWO

Of all the ridiculous expressions people use--and people use a great
many ridiculous expressions--one of the most ridiculous is "No news is
good news." "No news is good news" simply means that if you don't hear
from someone, everything is probably fine, and you can see at once why
this expression makes such little sense, because everything being fine
is only one of many, many reasons why someone may not contact you.
Perhaps they are tied up. Maybe they are surrounded by fierce weasels,
or perhaps they are wedged tightly between two refrigerators and
cannot get themselves out. The expression might well be changed to "No
news is bad news," except that people may not be able to contact you
because they have just been crowned king or are competing in a
gymnastics tournament. The point is that there is no way to know why
someone has not contacted you, until they contact you and explain
themselves. For this reason, the sensible expression would be "No news
is no news," except that it is so obvious it is hardly an expression
at all.

Obvious or not, however, it is the proper way to describe what
happened to the Baudelaires after they sent the desperate telegram to
Mr. Poe. Violet, Klaus, and Sunny sat and stared at the telegram
device for hours, waiting for some sign of the banker's reply. As the
hour grew later and later, they took turns dozing against the
merchandise of the Last Chance General Store, hoping for any response
from the man who was in charge of the orphans' affairs. And as the
first few rays of dawn shone through the window, illuminating all of
the price tags in the store, the only news the children had received
was that the shopkeeper had made some fresh cranberry muffins.

"I've made some fresh cranberry muffins," the shopkeeper said, peeking
around a tower of flour sifters. He was wearing at least two pot
holders on each hand and was carrying the muffins on a stack of
different-colored trays. "Normally I would put them up for sale,
between the phonograph records and the garden rakes, but I hate to
think of you three children going without breakfast when there are
vicious murderers on the loose, so have some for yourself, free of
charge."

"That's very kind of you," Violet said, as she and her siblings each
took a muffin from the shopkeeper's top tray. The Baudelaires, who had
not eaten since they left the village, soon made short work-a phrase
which here means "ate every warm, sweet crumb"-of the pastries.

"Goodness, you're hungry," the shopkeeper said. "Did everything go all
right with the telegram? Have you received a reply?"

"Not yet," Klaus said.

"Well, don't worry your tiny heads about it," the shopkeeper replied.
"Remember, no news is good news."

"No news is good news?" called out a voice from somewhere in the
store. "I have some news for you, Milt. All about those murderers."

"Lou!" the shopkeeper called in delight, and then turned to the
children. "Excuse me, please," he said. "Lou's here with The Daily
Punctilio.''

The shopkeeper walked through a bunch of rugs hanging from the
ceiling, and the Baudelaires looked at one another in dismay.

"What'll we do?" Klaus whispered to his sisters. "If the newspaper has
arrived, the shopkeeper will read that we're murderers. We'd better
run away."

"But if we run away," Violet said, "Mr. Poe won't be able to contact
us."

"Gykree!" Sunny cried, which meant "He's had all night to contact us,
and we haven't heard from him."

"Lou?" they heard the shopkeeper call out. "Where are you, Lou?"

"I'm over by the pepper grinders," the delivery person called out in
return. "And wait till you read this story about the three murderers
of that Count. It's got pictures and everything. I saw the police on
the way here, and they said they were closing in. The only people they
allowed in the area were me and those volunteer people. They're going
to capture those kids and send them right to jail."

"Kids?" the shopkeeper said. "The murderers are kids?"

"Yep," the delivery person replied. "See for yourself."

The children looked at one another, and Sunny gave a little whimper of
fear. Across the store they could hear the rustling of paper and then
the excited voice of the shopkeeper.

"I know those kids!" he cried. "They're in my store right now! I just
gave them some muffins!"

"You gave muffins to murderers?" Lou said. "That's not right, Milt.
Criminals should be punished, not fed pastries."

"I didn't know they were murderers then," the shopkeeper explained,
"but I sure know now. It says so right here in The Daily Punctilio.
Call the police, Lou! I'll grab these murderers and make sure they
don't escape."

The Baudelaires wasted no more time, and began to run in the opposite
direction from the men's voices, down an aisle of safety pins and
candy canes. "Let's head toward those ceramic ashtrays," Violet
whispered. "I think we can exit that way."

"But what happens when we exit?" Klaus whispered back.  "The delivery
person said that the police were closing in."

"Mulick!" Sunny cried, which meant "Let's discuss that at a later
time!"

"Egad!" The children could hear the shopkeeper's surprised voice from
several aisles over. "Lou, the kids aren't here!  Keep an eye out for
them."

"What do they look like?" the delivery-person called back.

"They look like three innocent children," the shopkeeper said, "but
they're really vicious criminals. Be careful."

The children ran around a corner and ducked into the next aisle,
pressing themselves against a rack of construction paper and canned
peas as they listened to the hurrying footsteps of the delivery
person. "Wherever you murderers are," he called, "you'd better give
up!"

"We're not murderers!" Violet cried in frustration.

'Of course you're murderers!" the shop-keeper answered. "It says so in
the newspaper!"

"Plus," the delivery person said in a sneering voice, "if you're not
murderers, why are you hiding and running?"

Violet started to answer, but Klaus covered her mouth before she could
say anything more. "They'll be able to tell where we are by our
voices," he whispered. "Just let them talk, and maybe we can escape."

"Lou, do you see them?" called the shopkeeper.

"No, but they can't hide forever," the delivery person said. "I'm
going to look over by the undershirts!"

The Baudelaires looked ahead of them and saw a pile of white
undershirts that happened to be on sale. Gasping, the children doubled
back, and ran down an aisle covered in ticking clocks.

"I'm going to try the clock aisle!" the shopkeeper cried. "They can't
hide forever!"

The children hurried down the aisle, sprinted past a rack of towel
racks and piggy banks, and scurried around a display of sensible plaid
skirts.

Finally, over the top shelf of an aisle containing nothing but
different kinds of bedroom slippers, Violet spotted a glimpse of the
exit, and silently pointed the way to her siblings.

"I bet they're in the sausage aisle!" the shopkeeper said.

"I bet they're near the bathtub display!" the delivery person called.

"They can't hide forever!" the shopkeeper cried.

The Baudelaires took a deep breath, and then bolted toward the exit of
the Last Chance General Store, but as soon as they got outside they
realized the shopkeeper was right. The sun was rising, revealing the
flat and desolate landscape the children had walked across all night.
In a few hours the entire countryside would be covered in sunlight,
and the land was so flat that the children would be seen from far, far
away. They couldn't hide forever, and as Violet, Klaus, and Sunny
stood outside the Last Chance General Store, it seemed that they
couldn't hide for even one more instant. "Look!" Klaus said, and
pointed in the direction of the rising sun. Parked a ways from the
store was a square, gray van with the letters V.F.D.  printed on its
side.

"That must be the Volunteers Fighting Disease," Violet said. "The
delivery person said only he and the volunteers were allowed in the
area."

"Then they're the only way we can hide," Klaus said.  "If we can sneak
aboard that van, we can escape from the police, at least for now."

"But this might be the right V.F.D.," Violet said. "If these
volunteers are part of the sinister secret the Quagmire triplets tried
to tell us about, we might be going from a bad situation to a worse
one."

"Or," Klaus said, "it might get us closer to solving the mystery of
Jacques Snicket. Remember, he said he worked as a volunteer, right
before he was murdered."

"It won't do us any good to solve the mystery of Jacques Snicket,"
Violet said, "if we're in jail."

"Blusin," Sunny said. She meant something along the lines of, "We
don't have much choice," and in small, tottering steps she led her
siblings toward the V.F.D. van.

"But how will we get on the van?" Violet asked, walking alongside her
sister.

"What will we say to the volunteers?" Klaus asked, hurrying to catch
up.

"Impro," Sunny said, which meant "We'll think of something," but for
once the three children didn't have to think of something. As the
youngsters reached the van, a friendly-looking man with a guitar in
his hands and a beard on his face leaned out of one of the windows and
called to them.

"We almost left you behind, brother and sisters!" he said. "We filled
the van up with free gas, and now we're all set to head off to the
hospital." With a smile, the man unlatched the door of the van and
opened it, beckoning to the three children. "Climb aboard," he said.
"We don't want our volunteers to get lost before we even sing the
first verse. I heard something about murderers lurking around this
area."

"Did you read it in the newspaper?" Klaus asked nervously.

The bearded man laughed, and strummed a cheerful chord on his guitar.
"Oh, no," he said. "We don't read the newspaper. It's too depressing.
Our motto is 'No news is good news.' You must be new volunteers, not
to know that. Well, hop in."

The Baudelaires hesitated. As I'm sure you know, it is rarely a good
idea to get into an automobile with somebody you haven't met before,
particularly if the person believes in such nonsense as "No news is
good news." But it is nevera good idea to stand around a flat and
empty landscape while the police are closing in to arrest you for a
crime you have not committed, and the three children paused for a
moment to decide between doing something which is rarely a good idea,
and something that is never a good idea. They looked at the bearded
man with the guitar. They looked at each other. And then they looked
back at the Last Chance General Store, where they saw the shopkeeper,
rushing out of the front door and toward the van. "O.K.," Violet said
finally. "We'll hop in." The bearded man smiled, and the children
stepped into the V.F.D. van and shut the door behind them.  They did
not hop, even though the man had asked them to "hop in," because
hopping is something done in the cheerful moments of one's life. A
plumber might hop, for instance, if she finally fixed a particularly
difficult leak in someone's shower. A sculptor would hop if his
sculpture of four basset hounds playing cards was finally finished.
And I would hop like nobody has ever hopped before, if I could somehow
go back to that terrible Thursday, and stop Beatrice from attending
that afternoon tea where she met Esme' Squalor for the first time. But
Violet, Klaus, and Sunny did not hop, because they were not plumbers
fixing leaks, or sculptors finishing works of art, or authors
magically erasing a series of unfortunate events. They were three
desperate children, falsely accused of murder, forced to run out of a
store into a stranger's automobile to avoid capture by the police. The
Baudelaires were not hopping, even as the van started its engine and
began to drive away from the Last Chance General Store, ignoring the
desperate signals of the shopkeeper as he ran to try to stop them. As
the V.F.D. van began to drive across the lonely landscape, the
Baudelaire orphans were not sure they would ever hop again.


CHAPTER THREE

We are Volunteers Fighting Disease,

And we're cheerful all day long.

If someone said that we were sad,

That person would be wrong.


We visit people who are sick,

And try to make them smile,

Even if their noses bleed,

Or if they cough up bile.


Tra la la, Fiddle dee dee,

Hope you get well soon.

Ho ho ho, hee hee hee,

Have a heart-shaped balloon.


We visit people who are ill,

And try to make them laugh,

Even when the doctor says

He must saw them in half.


We sing and sing all night and day,

And then we sing some more.

We sing to boys with broken bones

And girls whose throats are sore.


Tra la la, Fiddle dee dee,

Hope you get well soon.

Ho ho ho, hee hee hee,

Have a heart-shaped balloon.


We sing to men with measles,

And to women with the flu,

And if you breathe in deadly germs,

We'll probably sing to you.


Tra la la, Fiddle dee dee,

Hope you get well soon.

Ho ho ho, hee hee hee,

Have a heart-shaped balloon.


An associate of mine named William Congreve once wrote a very sad play
that begins with the line "Music has charms to soothe a savage
breast," a sentence which here means that if you are nervous or upset,
you might listen to some music to calm you down or cheer you up. For
instance, as I crouch here behind the altar of the Cathedral of the
Alleged Virgin, a friend of mine is playing a sonata on the pipe
organ, to calm me down and so the sounds of my typewriter will not be
heard by the worshipers sitting in the pews. The mournful melody of
the sonata reminds me of a tune my father used to sing when he did the
dishes, and as I listen to it I can temporarily forget six or seven of
my troubles.

But the soothing effect of music on a savage breast obviously depends
on what kind of music is being played, and I'm sorry to say that as
the Baudelaire orphans listened to the song of V.F.D., they did not
feel even one bit less nervous or upset. When Violet, Klaus, and Sunny
first boarded the V.F.D. van, they were so worried about avoiding
capture that they scarcely took a look around them until they were
quite far away from the Last Chance General Store. But when the
shopkeeper was merely a speck on the flat and empty landscape, the
children turned their attention to their new hiding place. There were
about twenty people in the van, and every single one of them was
exceedingly cheerful. There were cheerful men, cheerful women, a
handful of cheerful children, and a very cheerful driver who
occasionally took his eyes off the road to grin cheerfully at all his
passengers. When the Baudelaires took a long trip in an automobile,
they liked to pass the time reading or looking at the scenery and
thinking their own private thoughts, but as soon as the van pulled
away from the general store, the bearded man began playing his guitar
and led all of the Volunteers Fighting Disease in a cheerful song, and
each "tra la la" only made the Baudelaires more anxious than before.
When the volunteers began to sing the verse about people's noses
bleeding, the siblings were sure someone would stop singing and say,
"Wait a minute! These three children weren't on the van before! They
don't belong here!" When the singers reached the verse about the
doctor sawing someone in half, the children were certain someone would
stop singing and say, "Wait a minute! Those three people don't know
the lyrics to the song! They don't belong here!" And when the cheerful
passengers sung the section of the song discussing deadly germs, the
siblings were unequivocally positive that someone would stop singing
and say, "Wait a minute! Those three children are the murderers
described in The Daily Punctilio! They don't belong here!"

But the Volunteers Fighting Disease were too cheerful to wait a
minute. They believed so strongly that no news is good news that none
of them had even glanced at The Daily Punctilio. And they were too
busy singing to notice that the Baudelaires didn't belong on the van.

"Boy, do I love that song!" the bearded man said, when the last chorus
had ended. "I could sing it all the way to Heimlich Hospital. But I
guess we'd better save our voices for the day's work.  So why don't we
settle down and have cheerful conversations until we arrive?"

"That sounds super-duper!" said one of the volunteers, and everyone
nodded in agreement. The bearded man put away his guitar and sat down
next to the Baudelaires.

"We'd better make up false names," Violet whispered to Klaus, "so no
one will learn who we are."

"But The Daily Punctilio got our names wrong," Klaus whispered back,
"so maybe we should use our real names."

"Well, let's get to know each other," the bearded man said cheerfully.
"I like to get to know each and every one of our volunteers."

"Well, my name is Sally," Violet began, "and-"

"No, no," the bearded man said. "We don't use names in V.F.D. We just
call everybody 'sister' and 'brother,' because we believe all people
are sisters and brothers."

"I'm confused," Klaus said. "I always thought that brothers and
sisters are people who share the same parents."

"Not always, brother," the bearded man said.  "Sometimes brothers and
sisters are just people who are united for a common cause."

"Does that mean, brother," Violet said, trying this new use of the
word "brother" and not liking it much, "that you don't know the names
of anyone in this van?"

"That's right, sister," the bearded man said "And so you've never
known the name of anyone who's been a Volunteer Fighting Disease?"
Klaus asked.

"Not a single one," the bearded man said. "Why do you ask?"

"There's a person we know," Violet said carefully, "who we think might
have been in V.F.D. He had one eyebrow instead of two, and a tattoo of
an eye on his ankle."

The bearded man frowned. "I don't know anyone of that description," he
said, "and I've been with the Volunteers Fighting Disease since the
organization first started."

"Rats!" Sunny said.

"What my sister means," Klaus said, "is that we're disappointed. We
were hoping to learn more about this person."

"Are you sure he was in Volunteers Fighting Disease?" the bearded man
asked.

"No," Klaus admitted. "We just know he worked in the volunteer
something."

"Well, there are lots of volunteer somethings," the bearded man
replied. "What you kids need is some sort of Library of Records."

"A Library of Records?" Violet said.

"A Library of Records is a place where official information is
stored," the bearded man said. "In a Library of Records, you could
find a list of every single volunteer organization in the world. Or
you could look up this person and see if there's a file on him.
Perhaps that would tell you where he worked."

"Or how he knew our parents," Klaus said, speaking out loud without
thinking.

"Your parents?" the bearded man said, looking around the van. "Are
they here, too?"

The Baudelaires looked at one another, wishing that their parents were
there on the van, even though it would be awkward to call their father
"brother" and their mother "sister." Sometimes it seemed to the
children that it had been hundreds and hundreds of years since that
terrible day at the beach when Mr. Poe brought them the dreadful news,
but just as often it seemed as if it had been only minutes. Violet
could picture her father, sitting next to her, perhaps pointing out
something interesting he had seen through the window.  Klaus could
picture his mother, smiling and shaking her head in amusement at the
ridiculous lyrics of the V.F.D. song. And Sunny could picture all five
Baudelaires, together again, with nobody fleeing from the police, or
accused of murder, or trying desperately to solve mysteries, or worst
of all, gone forever in a terrible fire. But just because you can
picture something does not make it so. The Baudelaire parents were not
in the van, and the children looked at the bearded man and shook their
heads sadly.

"My, you look glum," the bearded man said. "Well, don't worry. I'm
sure wherever your parents are, they're having a good time, so let's
not see any frowny faces. Being cheerful is the whole point of
Volunteers Fighting Disease."

"What exactly will we be doing at the hospital?" Violet asked, eager
to change the subject.

"Just what V.F.D. says," the bearded man replied.  "We're volunteers,
and we'll be fighting diseases."

"I hope we won't be giving shots," Klaus said.  "Needles make me a bit
nervous."

"Of course we won't be giving shots," the bearded man said.  "We only
do cheerful things. Mostly we wander the halls singing to sick people,
and giving them heart-shaped balloons, like the song says."

"But how does that fight disease?" Violet said.

"Because getting a cheerful balloon helps people picture getting
better, and if you picture something, it makes it so," the bearded man
explained. "After all, a cheerful attitude is the most effective tool
against sickness."

"I thought antibiotics were," Klaus said.

"Echinacea!" Sunny said. She meant "Or well-tested herbal remedies,"
but the bearded man had stopped paying attention to the children and
was looking out the window.

"We've arrived, volunteers!" he called out. "We're at Heimlich
Hospital !" He turned to the Baudelaires and pointed out at the
horizon. "Isn't it a beautiful building?"

The children looked out the windows of the van and found that they
could only half agree with the bearded man, for the simple reason that
Heimlich Hospital was only half a building, or at best two-thirds. The
left side of the hospital was a shiny white structure, with a row of
tall pillars and small carved portraits of famous doctors over each
window. In front of the building was a neatly mowed lawn, with
occasional patches of brightly colored wildflowers.  But the right
side of the hospital was scarcely a structure at all, let alone a
beautiful one. There were a few boards nailed together into
rectangles, and a few planks nailed down for floors, but there were no
walls or windows, so it looked like a drawing of a hospital rather
than a hospital itself. There was no sign of any pillars and not even
one carved doctor portrait on this half-finished side, just a few
sheets of plastic fluttering in the wind, and instead of a lawn there
was just an empty field of dirt. It was as if the architect in charge
of constructing the building had decided halfway through that he'd
rather go on a picnic, and had never returned. The driver parked the
van underneath a sign that was half finished, too: the word "Heimlich"
was in fancy gold letters on a clean white square of wood, but the
word "Hospital" was scrawled in ballpoint pen on a piece of cardboard
ripped from an old box.

"I'm sure they'll finish it someday," the bearded man continued. "But
in the meantime, we can picture the other half, and picturing
something makes it so. Now, let's picture ourselves getting out of the
van."

The three Baudelaires did not have to picture it, but they followed
the bearded man and the rest of the volunteers out of the van and onto
the lawn in front of the prettier half of the hospital. The members of
V.F.D. were stretching their arms and legs after the long drive, and
helping the bearded man remove a big bunch of heart-shaped balloons
from the back of the van, but the children merely stood around
anxiously and tried to figure out what to do next.

"Where should we go?" Violet asked. "If we walk around the hallways of
the hospital singing to people, someone will recognize us."

"That's true," Klaus said. "The doctors, nurses, administrators, and
patients can't all believe that no news is good news. I'm sure some of
them have read this morning's Daily Punctilio."

"Aronec," Sunny said, which meant "And we're not getting any closer to
learning anything about V.F.D., or Jacques Snicket."

"That's true," Violet agreed. "Maybe we need to find a Library of
Records, like the bearded man said."

"But where can we find one?" Klaus asked. "We're in the middle of
nowhere."

"No walk!" Sunny said. "I don't want to start all that walking again
either," Violet said, "but I don't see what else we can do."

"O.K., volunteers!" the bearded man said. He took his guitar out of
the van and began playing some cheerful and familiar chords. "Everyone
take a heart-shaped balloon and start singing!  "We are Volunteers
Fighting Disease, And we 're cheerful all day long, If someone said
that we were sad, That person would be-"

"Attention!" interrupted a voice that seemed to come from the sky. The
voice was female but very scratchy and faint, as if the voice were
that of a woman talking with a piece of aluminum foil over her mouth.
"Your attention please!"

"Shh, everybody!" the bearded man said, stopping the song. "That's
Babs, the Head of Human Resources at the hospital. She must have an
important announcement."

"Attention!" the voice said. "This is Babs Head of Human Resources. I
have an important announcement."

"Where is she?" Klaus asked him, worried that she might recognize the
three accused murderers hiding in V.F.D.

"In the hospital someplace," the bearded man replied.  "She prefers
communicating over the intercom."

The word "intercom" here refers to someone talking into a microphone
someplace and having their voice come out of speakers someplace else,
and sure enough the children noticed a small row of square speakers
placed on the finished half of the building, just above the doctor
portraits. "Attention!" the voice said again, and it became even
scratchier and fainter, as if the woman with the piece of aluminum
foil over her mouth had fallen into a swimming pool filled with fizzy
soda. This is not a pleasant way to hear someone talk, and yet as soon
as Babs made her announcement, the savage breasts of the Baudelaire
orphans were instantly soothed, as if the scratchy and faint voice
were a calming piece of music. But the Baudelaires did not feel better
because of the way Babs's voice sounded. The announcement soothed the
children's savage breasts because of what it said.

"I need three members of the Volunteers Fighting Disease who are
willing to be given a new assignment," said the voice.  "Those three
volunteers should report immediately to my office, which is the
seventeenth door on the left as you enter the finished half of the
building. Instead of walking around the hallways of the hospital
singing to people, these three volunteers will be working in the
Library of Records here at Heimlich Hospital."


CHAPTER FOUR

Whether you have been sent to see the principal of your school for
throwing wet paper towels at the ceiling to see if they stick, or
taken to the dentist to plead with him to hollow out one of your teeth
so you can smuggle a single page of your latest book past the guards
at the airport, it is never a pleasant feeling to stand outside the
door of an office, and as the Baudelaire orphans stood at the door
reading "Office of the Head of Human Resources" they were reminded of
all the unpleasant offices they had recently visited On their very
first day at Prufrock Preparatory School, before they had even met
Isadora and Duncan Quagmire, the Baudelaires had visited the office of
Vice Principal Nero and learned about all of the academy's strict and
unfair rules. When they worked at Lucky Smells Lumbermill, the
siblings had been summoned to the office of the owner, who made clear
just how dreadful their situation really was. And, of course, Violet,
Klaus, and Sunny had been many, many times to Mr.  Poe's office at the
bank, where he coughed and talked on the phone and made decisions
about the Baudelaires' future that had not proved to be good ones. But
even if the children had not had all these unfortunate experiences in
offices, it was perfectly understandable that the Baudelaire children
had to stand for a few moments in front of the seventeenth door on the
left, and gather their courage to knock.

"I'm not sure we should take this risk," Violet said.  "If Babs has
read this morning's edition of The Daily Punctilio, she'll recognize
us soon as we walk through the door. We might well be knocking on the
door of our jail cell."

"But the Library of Records might be our only hope," Klaus said. "We
need to find out who Jacques Snicket really was-where he worked, and
how he knew us. If we get some evidence, we can convince people that
Count Olaf is still alive and that we're not murderers."

"Curoy," Sunny added, which meant "Besides, the Quagmire triplets are
far, far away, and we have only a few pages of their notebooks. We
need to find the real meaning of V.F.D."

"Sunny's right," Klaus said. "In the Library of Records, we might even
solve the mystery of that underground passageway that led from Jerome
and Esme' Squalor's apartment to the ashy remains of the Baudelaire
mansion."

"Afficu," Sunny said. She meant something like "And the only way we'll
get into the Library of Records is if we talk to Babs, so it's a risk
we have to take."

"All right," Violet said, looking down at her sister and smiling.
"You've convinced me. But if Babs begins looking at us suspiciously,
we'll leave, agreed?"

"Agreed," Klaus said.

"Yep," Sunny said, and knocked on the door.

"Who is it?" Babs's voice called out.

"It's three members of Volunteers Fighting Disease," Violet replied.
"We're here to volunteer at the Library of Records."

"Come in," Babs commanded, and the children opened the door and walked
into the office. "I was wondering when someone would show up," the
Head of Human Resources continued. "I was just finishing up reading
this morning's paper. These three terrible children are running around
killing people."

The Baudelaires looked at one another and were about to run back out
the door when they saw something in the office that changed their
minds. The office of the Head of Human Resources at Heimlich Hospital
was a small one, with a small desk, two small chairs, and a small
window decorated with two small curtains. On the windowsill was a
small vase of yellow flowers and on the wall was a small tasteful
portrait of a man leading a horse to a small pond of fresh water. But
it was not the furnishings, the flower arrangement, or the tasteful
artwork that made the three orphans stop.

Babs's voice had come from the direction of the desk, which the
Baudelaires had expected, but what they hadn't expected was that Babs
was not sitting behind the desk, or on the desk or even beneath it.
Instead, a small square intercom speaker-just like the ones on the
outside of the hospital-had been placed in the middle of the desk, and
it was from this speaker that the speaking had been spoken. It was
strange to hear speaking from a speaker instead of from the person who
was speaking, but the children realized they could not be recognized
if Babs could not see them, so they did not run out of the room.

"We're three children, too," Violet said to the speaker, trying to be
as honest as she could "but we'd much rather volunteer in the hospital
than embark on a life of crime."

"If you're children, then be silent!" Babs's voice said rudely. "In my
opinion, children should be seen and not heard.  I'm an adult, so it
follows that I should be heard and not seen.  That's why I work
exclusively over the intercom. You will be working exclusively with
the most important thing we do in this hospital. Can you guess what it
is?"

"Healing sick people?" Klaus guessed.

"Be silent!" the speaker commanded. "Children should be seen and not
heard, remember? Just because I can't see you doesn't mean you should
start babbling about sick people. You're wrong, anyway. The most
important thing we do at the hospital is paperwork, and you will be
working at the Library of Records, filing paperwork.  I'm sure this
will be difficult for you, because children never have any
administrative experience."


"Hend," said Sunny in disagreement. Violet was about to explain that
her sister meant something along the lines of "Actually, I worked as
an administrative assistant at Prufrock Preparatory School," but the
intercom speaker was too busy reproving the Baudelaires, a phrase
which here means "shouting 'Be silent!'" at every opportunity.

"Be silent!" the speaker shouted. "Instead of chattering away, report
to the Library of Records at once. The Library of Records is located
in the basement, at the very bottom of the staircase next to this
office. You'll go straight there every morning when the van arrives at
Heimlich Hospital, and you'll return straight to the van at the end of
each day. The van will take you back home.  Are there any questions?"

The Baudelaires had plenty of questions, of course, but they did not
ask them. They knew that if they said even one word, the intercom
speaker would command them to be silent, and besides, they were eager
to get to the Library of Records, where they hoped to answer the most
important questions of their lives.

"Excellent!" the speaker said. "You're learning to be seen instead of
heard. Now, get out of this office."

The children got out of that office and quickly found the staircase
the speaker had mentioned. The Baudelaires were glad that the route to
the Library of Records was so easy to remember, because Heimlich
Hospital seemed like a place where it would be very easy to get lost.
The staircase curved this way and that, leading to many doors and
corridors, and every ten feet or so, nailed to the wall just below an
intercom speaker there was a complicated map of the hospital, filled
with arrows, stars, and other symbols the Baudelaires did not
recognize. Every so often, the children would see someone from the
hospital walking toward them. Although neither the Volunteers Fighting
Disease nor the Head of Human Resources had recognized the three
children, it was certain that someone in the hospital must have read
The Daily Punctilio, and the Baudelaires did not want to be seen or
heard, and they would have to turn and face the wall, pretending to
consult the map so anyone walking by would not see their faces.

"That was close," Violet sighed in relief, when a group of chatting
doctors had gone by without even glancing at the youngsters.

"It was close," Klaus agreed, "and we don't want it to get any closer.
I don't think we should get back on the van at the end of the day-or
any other day. Sooner or later we're bound to be recognized."

"You're right," Violet said. "We'd have to walk back through the
hospital every day, just to get to the van. But where will we go at
night? People will think it is odd if three children are sleeping in
the Library of Records."

"Half," Sunny suggested.

"That's a pretty good idea," Violet replied. "We could sleep in the
unfinished half of the hospital. Nobody will go there at night."

"Sleep all by ourselves, in a half-finished room?" Klaus asked. "It'll
be cold and dark."

"It can't be much worse than the Orphans Shack at Prufrock Prep,"
Violet said.

"Danya," Sunny said, which meant "Or the bedroom at Count Olaf's
house."

Klaus shuddered, remembering how terrible it was when Count Olaf had
been their guardian. "You're right," he said, stopping at a door which
read "Library of Records." "The unfinished wing of the hospital can't
be that bad."

The Baudelaires knocked on the door, which opened almost immediately
to reveal one of the oldest men they had ever met, wearing one of the
tiniest pairs of glasses they had ever seen. Each lens was scarcely
bigger than a green pea, and the man had to squint in order to look at
them.

"My eyesight isn't what it used to be," he said, "but you appear to be
children. And you're very familiar children, too. I'm certain I've
seen your faces somewhere before."

The Baudelaires looked at one another in panic, not knowing whether to
dash out of the room or to try to convince the man he was mistaken.

"We're new volunteers," Violet said. "I don't think we've ever met
before."

"Babs assigned us to work in the Library of Records," Klaus said.

"Well, you've come to the right place," the old man said with a
wrinkled smile. "My name is Hal, and I've worked here in the Library
of Records for more years than I'd like to count. I'm afraid my
eyesight isn't what it used to be, so I asked Babs if some volunteers
could help me."

"Wolick," Sunny said.

"My sister says we're very happy to be of assistance," Violet said,
"and we are."

"Well, I'm glad to hear that," Hal said. "Because there's a lot of
work to be done. Come on in and I'll explain what you have to do."

The Baudelaires walked through the door and found themselves in a
small room with nothing much in it but a small table that held a bowl
of fresh fruit. "This is the library?" Klaus said "Oh no," the man
said. "This is just an antechamber, a small room I'm using to store my
fruit. If you get hungry during the day, you may help yourself to
something out of that bowl Also, this is where the intercom is, so
we'll have to report here whenever Babs makes an announcement." He led
them across the room to a small door and took a loop of string out of
the pocket of his coat. On the loop of string were hundreds of keys,
which made tiny clanging noises as they jostled one another. Hal
quickly found the right key to unlock the door.  "This," he said with
a small smile, "is the Library of Records."

Hal ushered the children inside a dim room with very low ceilings-so
low that Hal's gray hair almost brushed against the top. But although
the room was not very tall, it was enormous. The Library of Records
stretched out so far in front of the Baudelaires that they could
scarcely see the opposite wall, or, as the children looked from side
to side, the right and left walls. All they could see were big metal
file cabinets, with neatly labeled drawers describing the files
contained inside. The file cabinets were placed in row after row, as
far as the eye could see. The rows were placed very close together, so
that the siblings had to walk behind Hal in single file as he gave
them the tour of the room.

"I've organized everything myself," he explained. "The Library of
Records contains information not only from Heimlich Hospital, but from
all over the area. There's information about everything from poetry to
pills, from picture frames to pyramids, and from pudding to
psychology-and that's just in the P aisle, which we're walking down
right now."

"What an amazing place," Klaus said. "Just think of everything we can
learn from reading all these files."

"No, no, no," Hal said, shaking his head sternly.  "We're supposed to
file this information, not read it. I don't want to see you touching
any of these files except when you're working with them. That's why I
keep all these file cabinets locked up tight. Now, let me show you
exactly where you'll be working."

Hal led them to the far wall and pointed out a small rectangular hole,
just wide enough for Sunny or maybe Klaus to crawl through. Beside the
hole was a basket with a large stack of paper in it, and a bowl filled
with paper clips. "Authorities deposit information into the
information chute, which begins outside the hospital and ends right
here," he explained, "and I need two people to help me file these
deposits in the right place. Here's what you do.  First, you remove
the paper clips and put them in this bowl. Then you glance at the
information and figure out where it goes. Remember, try to read as
little as possible." He paused, unclipped a small stack of paper, and
squinted at the top page. "For instance," he continued "You only have
to read a few words to see that these paragraphs are about the weather
last week at Damocles Dock, which is on the shore of some lake
someplace. So you would ask me to unlock cabinets in aisle D, for
Damocles, or W, for weather, or even P, for paragraphs. It's your
choice."

"But won't it be difficult for people to find that information again?"
Klaus asked. "They won't know whether to look under D, W, or P."

"Then they'll have to look under all three letters," Hal said.
"Sometimes the information you need is not in the most obvious place.
Remember, paperwork is the most important thing we do at this
hospital, so your job is very important. Do you think you can file
these papers correctly? I'd like you to start right away."

"I think we can," Violet said. "But what will the third volunteer do?"

Hal looked embarrassed and held up the loop of string with all the
keys on it. "I lost some of the keys to the file cabinets," he
admitted, "know why you three seem so familiar." Hal continued to lead
Sunny down another aisle of file cabinets to show her where her teeth
could be handy, so his voice floated over to the two older Baudelaires
as if he were speaking on an intercom. "I didn't read it, of course,
but there was some information about you in the file about the Snicket
fires."


CHAPTER FIVE

I just don't understand it," said Klaus, which was not something he
said very often.

Violet nodded in agreement, and then said something she didn't say
very frequently either. "It's a puzzle I'm not sure we can solve."

"Pietrisycamollaviadelrechiotemexity," Sunny said, which was something
she had said only once before. It meant something along the lines of
"I must admit I don't have the faintest idea of what is going on," and
the first time the youngest Baudelaire had said it, she had just been
brought home from the hospital where she was born, and was looking at
her siblings as they leaned over her crib to greet her. This time, she
was sitting in the unfinished wing of the hospital where she worked,
and was looking at her siblings as they tried to guess what Hal had
meant when he had mentioned "the Snicket fires." If I had been with
the children, I would have been able to tell them a long and terrible
story about men and women who joined a noble organization only to find
their lives wrecked by a greedy man and a lazy newspaper, but the
siblings were alone, and all they had of the story were a few pages
from the Quagmire notebooks. It was night, and after working all day
in the Library of Records, the Baudelaire orphans had made themselves
as comfortable as they could in the half finished section of Heimlich
Hospital, but I'm sorry to say the phrase "as comfortable as they
could" here means "not very comfortable at all." Violet had found a
few flashlights designed to be used by builders working in dark
corners, but when she arranged them to light up their surroundings,
the light only made clear just how filthy their surroundings really
were. Klaus had found some dropcloths, designed to be used by painters
who did not want to drip paint on the floor, but when he wrapped them
around himself and his sisters, the warmth only made clear just how
freezing it was when the evening wind blew through the sheets of
plastic that were nailed to the wooden boards. And Sunny had used her
teeth to chop up some of the fruit in Hal's bowl, to make a sort of
fruit salad for dinner, but each handful of chopped fruit only made
clear just how inappropriate it was to be living in such a bare and
lonely place. But even though it was clear to the children how filthy,
freezing, and inappropriate their new living quarters were, nothing
else seemed clear at all.

"We wanted to use the Library of Records to learn more about Jacques
Snicket," Violet said, "but we might end up learning more about
ourselves. What in the world do you think is written about us in that
file Hal mentioned?"

"I don't know," Klaus replied, "and I don't think Hal knows, either.
He said he doesn't read any of the files."

"Seerg," Sunny said, which meant "And I was afraid to ask him any more
about it."

"Me, too," Violet said. "We simply can't call attention to ourselves.
Any minute now, Hal could learn that we're wanted for murder, and we'd
be dragged off to jail before we learned anything more."

"We've already escaped from one jail cell," Klaus said. "I don't know
if we could do it again."

"I thought that if we had a chance to look over these pages from
Duncan's and Isadora's notebooks," Violet said, "we would find the
answers to our questions, but the Quagmires' notes are very difficult
to read."

Klaus frowned, and moved a few fragments of the Quagmire pages around
as if they were pieces of a jigsaw puzzle. "The harpoon gun tore these
pages to shreds," he said. "Look what Duncan has written here:
'Jacques Snicket worked for V.F.D., which stands for Volunteer-' and
then it's ripped, right in the middle of the sentence."

"And on this page," Violet said, picking up a page I cannot bear to
think about, "it reads, "In photographs, and in each public place,
Snicket rarely shows his face. "Isadora must have written that
one-it's a rhyming couplet."

"This scrap says 'apartment,'" Klaus said, "and has what looks like
half of a map. That might have to do with the apartment where we lived
with Jerome and Esme' Squalor."

"Don't remind me," Violet said, shuddering at the thought of all the
misfortune the children had encountered at 667 Dark Avenue.

"Rabave," Sunny said, pointing to one of the pieces of paper.

"This page has two names on it," Violet said. "One name is Al
Funcoot."

"That's the man who wrote that horrible play Olaf forced us to
perform," Klaus said.

"I know," Violet said, "but the other name I don't recognize: 'Ana
Gram.'"

"Well, the Quagmires were researching Count Olaf and his sinister
plot," Klaus said. "Maybe Ana Gram is one of Olaf's associates."

"It's probably not the hook-handed man," Violet said, "or the bald man
with the long nose. Ana is not usually a man's name."

"It could be the name of one of the white-faced women," Klaus said.

"Orlando !" Sunny said, which meant "Or the one who looks like neither
a man nor a woman."

"Or someone we haven't even met yet," Violet said with a sigh, and
turned her attention to another piece of paper. "This page isn't
ripped at all, but all it has on it is a long list of dates. It looks
like something was going on every twelve weeks or so."

Klaus picked up the smallest piece and held it up for his sisters to
see. Behind his glasses his eyes looked very sad. "This piece just
says 'fire,'" he said quietly, and the three Baudelaires looked down
sadly at the dusty floor. With any word, there are subconscious
associations, which simply means that certain words make you think of
certain things, even if you don't want to. The word "cake," for
example, might remind you of your birthday, and the words "prison
warden" might remind you of someone you haven't seen in a very long
time. The word "Beatrice" reminds me of a volunteer organization that
was swarming with corruption, and the word "midnight" reminds me that
I must keep writing this chapter very quickly, or else I will probably
drown. But the Baudelaires had all sorts of subconscious associations
with the word "fire," and none of them were pleasant to think about.
The word made the children think of Hal, who had mentioned something
about the Snicket fires that afternoon in the Library of Records.
"Fire" made the youngsters think of Duncan and Isadora Quagmire, who
had lost their parents and their brother, Quigley, in a fire. And, of
course, the word "fire" made the Baudelaires think of the fire that
had destroyed their home and had begun the unfortunate journey that
had led them to the half-finished wing of Heimlich Hospital. The three
children huddled quietly together under their dropcloths, getting
colder and colder as they thought about all the fires and subconscious
associations that were in the Baudelaire lives.

"That file must contain the answers to all these mysteries," Violet
said finally. "We need to find out who Jacques Snicket was, and why he
had the same tattoo as Count Olaf."

"And we need to know why he was murdered," Klaus added, "and we need
to learn the secret of V.F.D."

"Us," Sunny said, which meant "And we need to know why there's a
picture of us in the file."

"We have to get our hands on that file," Violet said.

"That's easier said than done," Klaus pointed out.  "Hal told us
specifically not to touch any of the files we weren't working with,
and he'll be right there with us in the Library of Records."

"We'll just have to find a way," Violet replied. "Now, let's try and
get a good night's sleep, so we can stay alert tomorrow, and get ahold
of the file on the Snicket fires."

Klaus and Sunny nodded in agreement, and arranged the dropcloths into
a sort of bed, while Violet turned off the flashlights one by one. The
three Baudelaires huddled together for the rest of the night, getting
what sleep they could on a filthy floor with a cold wind blowing
through their inappropriate home, and in the morning, after a
breakfast of leftover fruit salad, they walked to the completed half
of Heimlich Hospital and carefully walked down all those stairs, past
the intercom speakers and the confusing maps. Hal was already in the
Library of Records when they arrived, unlocking the file cabinets with
his long loop of keys, and immediately Violet and Klaus got to work
filing the information that had come through the chute during the
night, while Sunny turned her tooths' attention to the file cabinets
that needed to be opened. But the Baudelaires' minds were not on
filing, or on file cabinets. Their minds were on the file.

Just about everything in this world is easier said than done, with the
exception of "systematically assisting Sisyphus's stealthy,
cyst-susceptible sister," which is easier done than said.  But it is
frustrating to be reminded of this fact. As Violet filed a piece of
paper containing information on cuttlefish under M, for mollusks, she
said to herself, "I'll just walk down the S aisle and look under
Snicket," but Hal was already in the S aisle, filing away paintings of
sewing machines, and she could not do what she said. As Klaus filed a
survey of thimbles under P, for protection of the thumb, he said to
himself, "I'll just walk down the F aisle and look under F, for
'fires,'" but by that time Hal had moved to the F aisle, and was
opening a file cabinet to rearrange biographies of famous Finnish
fishermen. And Sunny twisted her teeth this way and that, trying to
open one of the locked file cabinets in the B aisle, thinking that
perhaps the file was inside, filed under Baudelaires, but when the
lock finally broke just after lunch, the youngest sibling opened the
cabinet and saw that it was absolutely empty.

"Nil," Sunny said, as the three children took a short fruit break in
the antechamber.

"Me neither," Klaus said. "But how can we get ahold of the file, when
Hal is always around?"

"Maybe we can just ask him to find it for us," Violet said. "If this
were a regular library, we would ask the librarian for help. In a
Library of Records, maybe we should ask Hal."

"You can ask me anything you want," Hal said, walking into the
antechamber "but first I have to ask you something." He walked over to
the children and pointed at one of the fruits. "Is that a plum or a
persimmon?" he asked. "My eyesight isn't what it used to be, I'm
afraid."

"It's a plum," Violet said, handing it to him.

"Oh good," Hal replied, looking it over for bruises.  "I was not in
the mood for a persimmon. Now, what is your question?"

"We had a question about a certain file," Klaus began carefully, not
wanting Hal to become suspicious. "I know it's not customary for us to
read the files, but if we were very curious, would it be O.K. to make
an exception?"

Hal bit into the plum and frowned. "Why would you want to read one of
the files?" he asked. "Children should read happy books with bright
pictures, not official information from the Library of Records."

"But we're interested in official information," Violet said, "and
we're so busy filing things away that we don't get a chance to read
anything in the files. That's why we were hoping to take one home with
us and read it."

Hal shook his head. "Paperwork is the most important thing we do in
this hospital," he said sternly. "That's why the files are only
allowed out of the room if there's a very important reason.  For
example-"

But the Baudelaires did not get to hear an example, because Hal was
interrupted by a voice coming over the intercom.  "Attention!" the
voice said, and the children turned to face a small square speaker.
"Attention! Attention!"

The three siblings looked at one another in shock and horror, and then
at the wall where the speaker was hanging. The voice coming over the
intercom was not Babs's. It was a faint voice, and it was a scratchy
voice, but it was not the voice of the Head of Human Resources at
Heimlich Hospital. It was a voice that the Baudelaires heard wherever
they went, no matter where they lived or who tried to protect them,
and even though the children had heard this voice so many times
before, they had never gotten used to its sneering tone, as if the
person talking were telling a joke with a horrible and violent punch
line. "Attention!" the voice said again, but the orphans did not have
to be told to pay attention to the terrible voice of Count Olaf.

"Babs has resigned from Heimlich Hospital," said the voice, and the
siblings felt as if they could see the cruel smile Olaf always had on
his face when he was telling lies. "She decided to pursue a career as
a stuntwoman, and has begun throwing herself off buildings
immediately. My name is Mattathias, and I am the new Head of Human
Resources. I will be conducting a complete inspection of every single
employee here at Heimlich Hospital, beginning immediately.  That is
all."

"An inspection," Hal repeated, finishing his plum.  "What nonsense.
They should finish the other half of this hospital, instead of wasting
time inspecting everything."

"What happens during an inspection?" Violet asked.

"Oh, they just come and look you over," Hal said carelessly, and began
walking back to the Library of Records. "We'd better get back to work.
There is a lot more information to file."

"We'll be along in a moment," Klaus promised. "I'm not quite done with
my fruit."

"Well, hurry up," Hal said, and left the anteroom. The Baudelaires
looked at one another in worry and dismay.

"He's found us again," Violet said, talking quietly so Hal could not
hear them. She could barely hear her own voice over the sound of her
heart pounding with fear.

"He must know we're here," Klaus agreed. "That's why he's doing the
inspection-so he can find us and snatch us away."

"Tell!" Sunny said.

"Who can we tell?" Klaus asked. "Everyone thinks Count Olaf is dead.
They won't believe three children if we say that he's disguised
himself as Mattathias, the new Head of Human Resources."

"Particularly three children who are on the front page of The Daily
Punctilio," Violet added, "wanted for murder. Our only chance is to
get that file on the Snicket fires, and see if it has any evidence
that will bring Olaf to justice."

"But files aren't allowed out of the Library of Records," Klaus said.

"Then we'll have to read them right here," Violet said.

"That's easier said than done," Klaus pointed out. "We don't even know
what letter to look under, and Hal will be right in the room with us
all day long."

"Night!" Sunny said.

"You're right, Sunny," Violet said. "Hal is here all day long, but he
goes home at night. When it gets dark, we'll sneak back over here from
the half-finished wing. It's the only way we'll be able to find the
file."

"You're forgetting something," Klaus said. "The Library of Records
will be locked up tight. Hal locks all of the file cabinets,
remember?"

"I hadn't thought of that," Violet admitted. "I can invent one
lockpick, but I'm not sure I'll have time to invent enough lockpicks
to work on all those file cabinets."

"Deashew!" Sunny said, which meant something like "And it takes me
several hours to open one cabinet with my teeth!"

"Without the keys, we'll never get the file," Klaus said, "and without
the file, we'll never defeat Count Olaf. What can we do?"

The children sighed, and thought as hard as they could, staring in
front of them as they did so, and as soon as they stared in front of
them they saw something that gave them an idea. The thing they saw was
small, and round, and had colorful and shiny skin, and the youngsters
could see that it was a persimmon. But the Baudelaires knew that if
someone's eyesight wasn't what it used to be, it might look like a
plum. The Baudelaire orphans sat and stared at the persimmon, and
began to think how they might fool someone into thinking one thing was
really another.


CHAPTER SIX

This is not a tale of Lemony Snicket. It is useless to tell the
Snicket story, because it happened so very long ago, and because there
is nothing anybody can do about the way it has turned out, so the only
reason I could possibly have for jotting it down in the margins of
these pages would be to make this book even more unpleasant,
unnerving, and unbelievable than it already is. This is a story about
Violet, Klaus, and Sunny Baudelaire, and how they discovered something
in the Library of Records of Heimlich Hospital that changed their
lives forever and still gives me the heebie-jeebies whenever I am
alone at night STOP. But if this were a book about me, instead of
about the three children who would soon run into someone they had
hoped never to see again, I might pause for a moment and tell you
about something I did many years ago that still troubles me. It was a
necessary thing to do, but it was not a nice thing, and even now, I
get a small quiver of shame in my stomach whenever I remember it. I
might be doing something I enjoy-walking along the promenade deck of a
ship, or looking through a telescope at the aurora borealis, or
wandering into a bookstore and placing my books on the highest place
in the shelf, so that no one will be tempted to buy and read them-when
I will suddenly remember this thing I did, and think to myself, Was it
really necessary? Was it absolutely necessary to steal that sugar bowl
from Esme' Squalor?

The Baudelaire orphans were experiencing similar quivers that
afternoon, as they finished up the day's work in the Library of
Records. Every time Violet put a file in its proper place, she would
feel her hair ribbon in her pocket, and get a quiver in her stomach as
she thought about what she and her siblings were up to.  Klaus would
take a stack of papers from the basket in front of the deposit chute,
and instead of placing the paper clips in the small bowl, he would
keep them hidden in his hand, feeling a quiver in his stomach as he
thought about the trick he and his sisters were going to play. And
whenever Hal turned his back, and Klaus passed the paper clips to
Sunny, the youngest Baudelaire felt a quiver in her stomach as she
thought about the sneaky way they were going to return to the Library
of Records that night. By the time Hal was locking up the file
cabinets for the day with his long loop of keys, the three Baudelaire
children had enough quivers in their stomach to attend a Quivery
Stomach Festival, if there had been one in the area that afternoon.

"Is it absolutely necessary to do this?" Violet murmured to Klaus, as
the three children followed Hal out of the library into the anteroom.
She took her hair ribbon out of her pocket and smoothed it out, making
sure it didn't have any tangles. "It's not a nice thing to do."

"I know," Klaus answered, holding his hand out so Sunny could hand
back the paper clips. "I have a quiver in my stomach just thinking
about it. But it's the only way we can get our hands on that file."

"Olaf," Sunny said grimly. She meant "Before Mattathias gets his hands
on us," and as soon as she was finished with her sentence,
Mattathias's scratchy voice came over the intercom.

"Attention! Attention!" the voice said, as Hal and the Baudelaires
looked up at the square speaker. "This is Mattathias, the new Head of
Human Resources. Inspections are over for the day but will continue
tomorrow."

"What nonsense," Hal muttered, putting the loop of keys down on the
table. The Baudelaires looked at one another, and then at the keys, as
Mattathias continued his announcement.

"Also," the speaker said, "if anyone in the hospital has any valuables
of any kind, please bring them to the Human Resources office for
safekeeping. Thank you."

"My eyeglasses are somewhat valuable," Hal said, taking them off, "but
I'm not going to bring them to the Human Resources office. I might not
ever see them again."

"That's probably true," Violet said, shaking her head at Mattathias's
audacity, a word which here means "attempt to steal valuables from
hospital employees, in addition to snatching the Baudelaire fortune."

"Besides," Hal said, smiling at the children and reaching for his
coat, "nobody's going to steal anything from me. You three are the
only people I see at the hospital, and I trust you absolutely. Now,
where did I put my keys?"

"Here they are," Violet said, and the quiver in her stomach got worse.
She held up her hair ribbon, which had been tied into a circle to look
like a loop of string. Hanging from the ribbon was a long row of paper
clips, which Sunny had fashioned into different shapes with her teeth
when Hal wasn't looking. The result looked something like Hal's loop
of keys, the way a horse looks something like a cow, or a woman in a
green dress looks something like a pine tree, but there was no way
anyone would look at Violet's hair ribbon full of chewed-up paper
clips and think it was a ring of keys- unless, of course, their
eyesight was not what it used to be. The three children waited as Hal
squinted at what Violet was holding.

"Those are my keys?" Hal said doubtfully. "I thought I put them down
on the table."

"Oh, no," Klaus said quickly, standing in front of the table so Hal
wouldn't catch a glimpse of his real keys. "Violet has them."

"Here," Violet said, moving them back and forth so they would be even
harder to squint at, "why don't I put them in your coat pocket for
you?"

"Thank you," Hal said, as Violet dropped them into his overcoat
pocket. He looked at the Baudelaires, his tiny eyes shining with
gratitude. "That's another way you three have helped me. My eyesight's
not what it used to be, you know, so I'm glad I can rely on such good
volunteers. Well, good night, children. I'll see you tomorrow."

"Good night, Hal," Klaus replied. "We're just going to have one last
piece of fruit here in the anteroom."

"Don't spoil your dinner," Hal said. "It's supposed to be a very cold
evening, so I bet your parents have cooked up a nice hot meal." Hal
smiled and shut the door behind him, leaving the children alone with
the real keys to the Library of Records and the quivery feeling still
in their stomachs.

"Someday," Violet said quietly, "we'll apologize to Hal for playing a
trick on him, and explain why we had to break the rules. This wasn't a
nice thing to do, even though it was necessary."

"And we'll return to the Last Chance General Store," Klaus said, "and
explain to the shopkeeper why we had to run away."

"Twisp," Sunny said firmly, which meant "But not until we get ahold of
the file, solve all these mysteries, and prove our innocence."

"You're right, Sunny," Violet said, with a sigh.  "Let's get started.
Klaus, see if you can find the right key for the Library door."

Klaus nodded, and carried Hal's keys over to the door.  Not too long
ago, when the Baudelaires had been staying with Aunt Josephine by the
shores of Lake Lachrymose, Klaus had been in a situation in which he
had to match up a key to a locked door very, very quickly, and since
then he had been quite good at it. He looked at the lock of the door,
which had a very short and narrow keyhole, and then looked at the loop
of string, which had one very short and narrow key, and in no time at
all the children were reentering the Library of Records and looking
down the dim aisles of file cabinets.

"I'm going to lock the door behind us," Klaus said, "so that nobody
will get suspicious if they happen to walk into the anteroom."

"Like Mattathias," said Violet with a shudder. "On the intercom he
said that they were stopping the inspections for the day, but I bet
he's really still looking."

"Vapey," Sunny said, which meant "Then let's hurry."

"Let's start with the S aisle," Violet said. "For Snicket."

"Right," Klaus said, locking the door with a rattle.  The three
children found the S aisle and began walking past the file cabinets,
reading the labels on them to figure out which one to open.

"Sauce to Saxifrage," Klaus read out loud. "That means that anything
that falls alphabetically between the word 'sauce' and the word
'saxifrage' will be in this cabinet. That would be fine if we wanted
the Sawmill file."

"Or the Sauna file," Violet said. "Let's move on."

The children moved on, their footsteps echoing off the low ceilings of
the room.

"Scarab to Scavenger," Klaus said, reading one farther down the aisle.
Sunny and Violet shook their heads, and the Baudelaires kept moving.

"Secretary to Sediment," Violet read. "We're still not there."

"Kalm," Sunny said, which meant "I can't read very well, but I think
this one says 'Sequel to Serenity.'"

"You're right, Sunny," Klaus said, smiling at his sister. "It's the
wrong one."

"Shed to Sheepshank," Violet read.

"Shellac to Sherbet," Klaus read, walking farther down the aisle.

"Shipwreck to Shrimp."

"Sicily to Sideways."

"Skylight to Slob."

"Sludge to Smoke."

"Snack to Snifter."

"Snowball to Sober."

"Sonnet to Spackle."

"Wait!" Klaus cried. "Back up! Snicket is between Snack and Snifter."

"You're right," Violet said, stepping back to find the right cabinet.
"I was so distracted by all the strange file names that I forgot what
we were looking for. Here it is, Snack to Snifter. Let's hope the file
we're looking for is here."

Klaus looked at the lock on the file cabinet, and found the right key
on Hal's loop on only the third try. "It should be in the bottom
drawer," Klaus said, "close to Snifter. Let's look."

The Baudelaires looked. A snifter is a type of glass, usually meant
for holding brandy, although it is also the term for a strong wind.
Plenty of words are close to "snifter" in the alphabet, and the
children found many of them. There was a file on sniffing, which
seemed to have many photographs of noses. There was a file on Snell's
Law, which states that a ray of light passing from one uniform medium
to another produces an identical ratio between the sine of the angle
of incidence and the sine of the angle of refraction, which Klaus
already knew. There was a file on the inventor of the sneaker, whom
Violet admired very much, and one on snicking, which is something
Sunny had done many times with her teeth. But there was not a single
scrap of paper marked Snicket. The children sighed in disappointment,
and shut the drawer of the file cabinet so Klaus could lock it again.

"Let's try the J aisle, for Jacques," Violet suggested.

"Shh," Sunny said.

"No, Sunny," Klaus said gently. "I don't think the H aisle is a good
bet. Why would Hal have filed it under H?"

"Shh," Sunny insisted, pointing at the door, and her siblings knew
instantly that they had misunderstood her. Usually when Sunny said
"Shh," she meant something along the lines of "I think the H aisle
might be a good place to look for the file," but this time she meant
something more along the lines of "Be quiet! I think I hear someone
walking into the anteroom of the Library of Records." Sure enough,
when the Baudelaires listened closely, they could hear the clomping of
some odd, teetering footsteps, as if someone were walking on very thin
stilts. The footsteps grew closer and closer, and then stopped, and as
the three children held their breath, the door to the Library rattled
as someone tried to open the door.

"Maybe it's Hal," Violet whispered, "trying to unlock the door with a
paper clip."

"Maybe it's Mattathias," Klaus whispered, "looking for us."

"Janitor," Sunny whispered.

"Well, whoever it is," Violet said, "we'd better hurry to the J
aisle."

The Baudelaires tiptoed across the low-ceilinged room to the J aisle,
and walked down it quickly, reading the labels of the file cabinets.

"Jabberwocky to Jackal."

"Jacket to Jack-o'-Lanterns."

"Nersai."

"That's it!" Klaus whispered. "Jacques will be in Jackline to
Jacutinga."

"We hope," Violet said, as the door rattled again.  Klaus hurried to
find the right key, and the children opened the top drawer to look for
Jacques. As Violet knew, jackline is a kind of rope used in sailing,
and as Klaus knew, jacutinga is a sort of gold- bearing iron ore found
in Brazil, and once again there were plenty of files between these
two, but although the children found information on jack-o'-lanterns,
Jack Russell terriers, and Jacobean drama, there was no file marked
"Jacques."

"Fire!" Klaus whispered, shutting and locking the file cabinet. "Let's
head to the F aisle."

"And hurry," Violet said. "It sounds like the person in the anteroom
is picking the lock."

It was true. The Baudelaires paused for a moment and heard a muffled
scratching from behind the door, as if something long and thin were
being stuck in the keyhole to try to unlock the lock.  Violet knew,
from when she and her siblings lived with Uncle Monty, that a lockpick
can often take a long time to work properly, even if it has been made
by one of the world's greatest inventors, but the children nonetheless
moved to the F aisle as fast as their tiptoes could carry them.

"Fabian to Fact."

"Fainting to Fangs."

"Fatalism to Faulkner."

"Fear to Fermat."

"Ficus to Filth."

"Fin de Sie'cle to Fissle-here it is!"

Once more, the Baudelaires hurried to find the proper key, and then
the proper drawer and then the proper file. "Fin de sie'ecle" is a
term for a time in history when a century is drawing to a close, and
"fissle" is a fancy word for a rustling noise, like the one that
continued to come from behind the locked door as the children looked
frantically for Fire. But the papers went right from Finland to
Firmament, without a single word on Fire in between.

"What will we do?" Violet asked, as the door began to rattle again.
"Where else could the file be?"

"Let's try to think," Klaus said. "What did Hal say about the file? We
know it has to do with Jacques Snicket, and with fire."

"Prem!" Sunny said, which meant "But we looked under Snicket, Jacques,
and Fire already."

"There must be something else," Violet said. "We have to find this
file. It has crucial information about Jacques Snicket and V.F.D."

"And about us," Klaus said. "Don't forget that."

The three children looked at one another.

"Baudelaire!" Sunny whispered.

Without another word, the orphans ran to the B aisle, and hurried past
Babbitt to Babylon, Bacteria to Ballet, and Bamboo to Baskerville,
stopping at Bat Mitzvah to Bavarian Cream. As the door continued to
fissle behind them, Klaus tried nine keys in a row before finally
opening the cabinet, and there, between the Jewish coming-of- age
ceremony for young women, and the delicious filling of certain
doughnuts, the children found a folder marked "Baudelaire."

"It's here," Klaus said, taking it out of the drawer with trembling
hands.

"What does it say? What does it say?" Violet asked in excitement.

"Look," Klaus said. "There's a note on the front."

"Read it!" Sunny said in a frantic whisper, as the door began to shake
violently on its hinges. Whoever was on the other side of the door was
obviously getting frustrated with trying to pick the lock.

Klaus held up the file so he could see what the note said in the dim
light of the room. "'All thirteen pages of the Snicket file,'" he
read, '"have been removed from the Library of Records for the official
investigation.'" He looked up at his sisters, and they could see that,
behind his glasses, his eyes were filling with tears.  "That must be
when Hal saw our picture," he said. "When he removed the file and gave
it to the official investigators." He dropped the file on the floor
and then sat down beside it in despair. "There's nothing here."

"Yes there is!" Violet said. "Look!"

The Baudelaires looked at the file where Klaus had dropped it on the
ground. There, behind the note, was a single sheet of paper. "It's
page thirteen," Violet said, looking at a number typed in a corner of
the paper. "The investigators must have left it behind by mistake."

"That's why you should keep paper clips on papers that belong
together," Klaus said, "even when you file them. But what does the
page say?"

With a long crackle!and a loud bang,the door to the Library of Records
was knocked off its hinges, and fell to the floor of the enormous room
as if it had fainted. But the children paid no attention. Violet,
Klaus, and Sunny all sat and looked at page thirteen of the file, too
amazed to even listen to the odd, teetering footsteps as the intruder
entered the room and began to walk along the aisles of file cabinets.

Page thirteen of the Baudelaire file was not a crowded sheet of
paper-there was just one photograph stapled into place, below one
sentence of type. But sometimes it takes only a photograph and a
sentence to make an author cry himself to sleep even years after the
photograph was taken, or to make three siblings sit and stare at a
page for a long time, as if an entire book were printed on one sheet
of paper.

There were four people in the photograph, standing together outside a
building the Baudelaires recognized immediately. It was 667 Dark
Avenue, where the orphans had lived with Jerome and Esme' Squalor for
a brief time, until it became another place too treacherous for the
children to stay. The first person in the photograph was Jacques
Snicket, who was looking at the photographer and smiling. Standing
next to Jacques was a man who was turned away from the camera, so the
children could not see his face, only one of his hands, which was
clutching a notebook and pen, as if the obscured man were a writer of
some sort. The children had not seen Jacques Snicket since he was
murdered, of course, and the writer appeared to be someone they had
never seen at all. But standing next to these two people were another
two people the Baudelaire children thought they would never see again.
Bundled up in long coats, looking cold but happy, were the Baudelaire
parents.

"Because of the evidence discussed on page nine," read the sentence
above the photograph, "experts now suspect that there may in fact be
one survivor of the fire, but the survivor's whereabouts are unknown."


CHAPTER SEVEN

"I never thought I'd live to see the day," Violet said, and took
another look at page thirteen of the file. The Baudelaire parents
looked back at her, and for a moment it seemed to Violet her father
would step out of the photograph and say, "There you are, Ed. Where
have you been?" Ed was short for Thomas Alva Edison, one of the
greatest inventors of all time, and it was a special nickname only
used by her father, but the man in the photograph did not move, of
course, but only stood smiling in front of 667 Dark Avenue.

"Me neither," Klaus said. "I never thought we'd see our parents
again." The middle Baudelaire looked at his mother's coat, which had a
secret pocket on the inside. In the secret pocket, she often kept a
small pocket dictionary, which she would take out whenever she
encountered a word she did not know. Because Klaus was so interested
in reading, she had promised that someday she would give the pocket
dictionary to him, and now it seemed to Klaus that his mother was
about to reach into her coat and put the small, leatherbound book in
his hand.

"Neither me," Sunny said. She looked at her parents' smiles, and
suddenly remembered, for the first time since the fire, a song that
her mother and father used to sing together, when it was time for
Sunny to go to sleep. The song was called "The Butcher Boy," and the
Baudelaire parents would take turns singing the verses, her mother
singing in her breathy, high voice, and her father in his, which was
as low and deep as a foghorn. "The Butcher Boy" was the perfect way
for Sunny to end the day, safe and cozy in the Baudelaire crib.

"This photograph must have been taken a long time ago," Violet said.
"Look how much younger they look. They aren't even wearing their
wedding rings."

"'Because of the evidence discussed on page nine,'" Klaus said,
reading the sentence typed above the photograph, "'experts now suspect
that there may in fact be one survivor of the fire, but the survivor's
whereabouts are unknown.'" He stopped, and looked at his sisters.
"What does that mean?" he said, in a very faint voice.  "Does that
mean one of our parents is still alive?"

"Well, well, well," said a familiar and sneering voice, and the
children heard the odd, tottering footsteps walk straight toward them.
"Look what we have here."

The Baudelaire orphans had been so shocked by what they had found that
they had forgotten about the person breaking into the Library of
Records, and now they looked up to see a tall skinny figure walking
down the B aisle STOP. It was a person they had seen recently, and one
they had hoped never to see again. There are many different ways of
describing this person, including "Count Olaf's girlfriend," "the
Baudelaire children's former guardian," "the city's sixth most
important financial advisor," "a former resident of 667 Dark Avenue,"
and several phrases that are far too nasty to be placed in a book. But
the name she preferred was the one that came snarling out of her
lipsticked mouth.

"I am Esme' Gigi Geniveve Squalor," said Esme' Gigi Geniveve Squalor,
as if the Baudelaires would ever forget her, no matter how hard they
tried. She stopped walking and stood in front of the Baudelaires, who
saw immediately why her footsteps had been so odd and tottering. For
as long as the children had known her, Esme' Squalor had been a slave
to fashion, a phrase which here means "dressed in incredibly
expensive, and often incredibly absurd, outfits." This evening she was
wearing a long coat made from the fur of a number of animals that had
been killed in particularly unpleasant ways, and she was carrying a
handbag shaped like an eye, just like the tattoo her boyfriend had on
his left ankle. She wore a hat with a small veil that hung in front of
her face, as if she had blown her nose with a black lacy handkerchief,
and then forgotten to remove it, and on her feet she had a pair of
shoes with stiletto heels. A stiletto is a small, slender knife
resembling a dagger, such as might be carried by a carnival performer
or a murderer, and the word "stiletto" has been used to describe a
woman's shoe with a very long and narrow heel. In this case, however,
the phrase "shoes with stiletto heels" actually refers to a pair of
shoes made with a small, slender knife where each heel should be. The
stilettos were pointing straight down, so that Esme' viciously stabbed
the floor of the Library of Records with each step, and occasionally
the stilettos stuck, so the wicked woman had to pause and yank them
out of the floor, which explained why her footsteps were so odd and
tottering.  These shoes happened to be the absolute latest fashion,
but the Baudelaires had more important things to do than leaf through
magazines describing what was in and what was out, so they could only
stare at Esme''s shoes and wonder why she was wearing footwear that
was so violent and impractical.

"This is a pleasant surprise," Esme' said. "Olaf asked me to break in
here and destroy the Baudelaire file, but now we can destroy the
Baudelaires as well."

The children looked at each other in shock. "You and Olaf know about
the file?" Violet asked.


Esme' laughed in a particularly nasty way, and, from behind her veil,
smiled a particularly nasty smile. "Of course we know about it," she
snarled. "That's why I'm here-to destroy all thirteen pages." She took
one odd, tottering step toward the Baudelaires.  "That's why we
destroyed Jacques Snicket." She took another stabbing step down the
aisle. "And that's why we're going to destroy you." She looked down at
her shoe and shook her foot wildly to get the blade out of the library
floor. "Heimlich Hospital is about to have three new patients," she
said, "but I'm afraid it'll be too late for any doctor to save their
lives."

Klaus stood up, and followed his sisters as they began to step away
from the slave to fashion who was moving slowly toward them. "Who
survived the fire?" he asked Esme', holding up the page from the file.
"Is one of our parents alive?"

Esme' frowned, and teetered on her stiletto heels as she tried to
snatch the page away. "Did you read the file?'"she demanded in a
terrible voice. " What does the file say?"

"You'll never find out!" Violet cried, and turned to her siblings.
"Run!"

The Baudelaires ran, straight down the aisle past the rest of the B
files, rounding the corner past the cabinet that read "Byron to
Byzantine" and around to the section of the library where all of the C
files were stored.

"We're running the wrong way," Klaus said.

"Egress," Sunny agreed, which meant something along the lines of,
"Klaus is right-the exit is the other way."

"So is Esme'," Violet replied. "Somehow, we'll have to go around her."

"I'm coming for you!" Esme' cried, her voice coming over the top of
the file cabinets. "You'll never escape, orphans!"

The Baudelaires paused at the cabinet reading "Conch to Condy's
Fluid," which are a fancy seashell and a complex chemical compound,
and listened as Esme''s heels clattered in pursuit.

"We're lucky she's wearing those ridiculous shoes," Klaus said. "We
can run much faster than she can."

"As long as she doesn't think of taking them off," Violet said. "She's
almost as clever as she is greedy."

"Shh!" Sunny said, and the Baudelaires listened as Esme''s footsteps
abruptly stopped.

The children huddled together as they heard Olaf's girlfriend mutter
to herself for a moment, and then the three youngsters began to hear a
terrifying sequence of sounds. There was a long, screechy creak,and
then a booming crash,and then another long, screechy creak,and another
booming crash,and the pair of sounds continued, getting louder and
louder. The youngsters looked at one another in puzzlement, and then,
just in the nick of time, the oldest Baudelaire figured out what the
sound was.

"She's knocking over the file cabinets!" Violet cried, pointing over
the top of Confetti to Consecration. "They're toppling over like
dominos!"

Klaus and Sunny looked where their sister was pointing and saw that
she was right. Esme' had pushed over one file cabinet, which had
pushed over another, which had pushed over another, and now the heavy
metal cabinets were crashing toward the children like a wave crashing
on the shore. Violet grabbed her siblings and pulled them out of the
path of a falling file cabinet. With a creak and a crash, the cabinet
fell to the floor, right where they had been standing. The three
children breathed a sigh of relief, having just narrowly avoided being
crushed beneath files on congruent triangles, coniferous trees,
conjugated verbs, and two hundred other topics.

"I'm going to flatten you!" Esme' called, starting on another line of
cabinets. "Olaf and I are going to have a romantic breakfast of
Baudelaire pancakes!"

"Run!" Sunny cried, but her siblings needed no urging.  The three
children hurried down the rest of the C aisle, as the cabinets creaked
and crashed all around them.

"Where can we go?" Violet cried.

"To the D aisle!" Klaus answered, but changed his mind as he saw
another row of cabinets begin to topple. "No! The E aisle!"

"B?" Violet asked, finding it difficult to hear over the sounds of the
cabinets.

"E!" Klaus cried. "E as in Exit!" The Baudelaires ran down E as in
Exit, but when they reached the last cabinet, the row was becoming F
as in Falling File Cabinets, G as in Go the Other Way! and H as in How
in the World Are We Going to Escape? Before long, the children found
themselves as far from the anteroom door as they possibly could be. As
the cabinets crashed around them, and Esme' cackled wildly and stabbed
the floor in pursuit, the three youngsters found themselves in the
area of the Library of Records where information was deposited. As the
room creaked and crashed around them, the siblings looked first at the
basket of papers, then at the bowl of paper clips, then the mouth of
the chute, and finally at one another.

"Violet," Klaus said hesitantly, "do you think you can invent
something out of paper clips and a basket that could help us get out
of here?"

"I don't have to," Violet said. "That chute will serve as an exit."

"But you won't fit in there," Klaus said. "I'm not even sure I will."

"You're never going to get out of this room alive, you imbeciles!"
Esme' cried, using a horrible word in her horrible voice.

"We'll have to try," Violet said. "Sunny, go first."

"Prapil," Sunny said doubtfully, but she went first, crawling easily
into the chute and staring out through the darkness at her siblings.

"Now you, Klaus," Violet said, and Klaus, removing his glasses so they
wouldn't break, followed his sister. It was a tight fit, and it took
some manuevering, but eventually the middle Baudelaire worked his way
through the mouth of the chute.

"This won't work," Klaus said to Violet, peering around him. "It'll be
tough to crawl up through the chute, the way it's slanted. Besides,
there's no way you'll fit."

"Then I'll find another way," Violet said. Her voice was calm, but
Klaus and Sunny could see, through the hole in the wall, that her eyes
were wide with fear.

"That's out of the question," Klaus said. "We'll climb back out, and
the three of us will escape together."

"We can't risk it," Violet said. "Esme' won't catch all of us, not if
we split up. You two take page thirteen and go up the chute, and I'll
get out another way. We'll meet up in the unfinished wing."

"No!" Sunny cried.

"Sunny's right," Klaus said. "This is what happened with the
Quagmires, remember? When we left them behind, they were snatched
away."

"The Quagmires are safe now," Violet reminded him.  "Don't worry, I'll
invent a solution."

The eldest Baudelaire gave her siblings a small smile, and reached
into her pocket so she could tie up her hair and put the levers and
gears of her inventing mind into motion. But there was no ribbon in
her pocket. As her trembling fingers explored her empty pocket, she
remembered she had used her ribbon to fool Hal with a fake loop of
keys. Violet felt a quiver in her stomach as she remembered, but she
had no time to feel bad about the trick she had played. With sudden
horror, she heard a creak right behind her, and she jumped out of the
way just in time to avoid the crash. A file cabinet labeled
"Linguistics to Lions" fell against the wall, blocking the mouth of
the chute.

"Violet!" Sunny cried. She and her brother tried to push the cabinet
aside, but the strength of a thirteen-year-old boy and his baby sister
were no match against a metal case holding files on everything from
the history of language to a large carnivorous feline found in
sub-Saharan Africa and parts of India.

"I'm O.K.," Violet called back.

"Not for long you're not!" Esme' snarled, from a few aisles over.

Klaus and Sunny sat in the dark chute and heard their sister's faint
voice as she called to them. "Leave me here!" she insisted. "I'll meet
you back in our filthy, cold, inappropriate home."

The two younger Baudelaires huddled together at the entrance of the
chute, but it is useless for me to describe to you how desperate and
terrified they felt. There is no reason to describe how horrible it
was to hear Violet's frantic footsteps across the Library of Records,
or the odd, tottering ones of Esme' as she pursued the eldest
Baudelaire in her stiletto heels, creakingand crashingfile cabinets
with every stabbing step. It is unnecessary to describe the cramped
and difficult journey Klaus and Sunny made up the chute, which was
slanted so steeply that it felt to the two orphans like they were
crawling up a large mountain covered in ice instead of a fairly short
chute used for depositing information. It is ineffectual to describe
how the two children felt when they finally reached the end of the
chute, which was another hole, carved into the outside wall of
Heimlich Hospital, and found that Hal was right when he said it was to
be a particularly cold evening. And it is absolutely futile-a word
which here means "useless, unnecessary, and ineffectual, because there
is no reason for it"-to describe how they felt as they sat in the
half-finished section of the hospital, with drop cloths wrapped around
them to keep them warm and flashlights lit around them to keep them
company, and waited for Violet to show up, because Klaus and Sunny
Baudelaire were not thinking of these things.

The two younger Baudelaires sat together, clutching page thirteen of
the Baudelaire file, as the night grew later and later, but they were
not thinking about the noises they heard coming from the Library of
Records, or about the journey up the chute or even about the icy
breeze as it blew through the plastic sheets and chilled the
Baudelaire bones. Klaus and Sunny were thinking about what Violet had
said, when she saw the piece of paper they were clutching now. "I
never thought I'd live to see the day," Violet had said, and her two
siblings knew that the phrase was just another way of saying "I'm very
surprised" or "I'm extremely flabbergasted" or "This blows my mind
beyond belief." But now, as the two Baudelaires waited more and more
anxiously for their sister, Klaus and Sunny began to fear that the
phrase Violet used was more appropriate than she ever would have
guessed. As the first pale rays of the morning sun began to shine on
the unfinished half of the hospital, the Baudelares grew more and more
frightened that their sister would not live to see the day.


CHAPTER EIGHT

Heimlich Hospital is gone now, and will probably never be rebuilt. If
you want to visit it, you have to convince a farmer to let you borrow
his mule, for nobody in the surrounding area is willing to go within
twelve miles of its wreckage, and once you arrive you can hardly blame
them. The few scraps of the building that have survived are covered
with a thick and prickly type of ivy called kudzu, which makes it
difficult to see what the hospital looked like when the Baudelaires
first arrived in the V.F.D.  van. The confusing maps have been gnawed
off the walls of the sagging staircases, so it is very hard to imagine
how troublesome it was to find one's way through all of the areas of
the building. And the intercom system has long since crumbled away,
with only a handful of square speakers left sitting among the ashen
rubble, so it is impossible to imagine just how unnerving it was when
Klaus and Sunny heard the latest announcement from Mattathias.

"Attention!" Mattathias announced. There were no intercom speakers
installed in the unfinished half of the hospital, so the two younger
Baudelaires had to listen very hard to hear the scratchy voice of
their enemy coming from one of the outdoor speakers.

"Attention! Attention! This is Mattathias, the Head of Human
Resources. I am canceling the remainder of the hospital inspections.
We have found what we were looking for." There was a pause as
Mattathias moved away from the microphone, and as Klaus and Sunny
listened very hard, they could hear the faint, faint noise of
triumphant, high pitched laughter coming from the Head of Human
Resources.

"Excuse me," he continued, when his giggling fit was over. "To
continue, please be aware that two of the three Baudelaire
murderers-Klaus and Sun-I mean, Klyde and Susie Baudelaire-have been
spotted in the hospital. If you see any children whom you recognize
from The Daily Punctilio, please capture them and notify the police."
Mattathias stopped talking and began to giggle again, until the
children heard the voice of Esme' Squalor whispering, "Darling, you
forgot to turn off the intercom." Then there was a click, and
everything was silent.

"They caught her," Klaus said. Now that the sun had risen, it wasn't
very cold in the half-finished section of the hospital, but the middle
Baudelaire shivered nonetheless. "That's what Mattathias meant when he
said that they had found what they were looking for."

"Danger," Sunny said grimly.

"She certainly is," Klaus said. "We have to rescue Violet before it's
too late."

"Virm," Sunny said, which meant "But we don't know where she is."

"She must be somewhere in the hospital," Klaus said, "otherwise
Mattathias wouldn't still be here. He and Esme' are probably hoping to
capture us, too."

"Ranee," Sunny said.

"And the file," Klaus agreed, taking page thirteen out of his pocket,
where he had been storing it for safekeeping along with the scraps of
the Quagmire notebooks. "Come on, Sunny. We've got to find our sister
and get her out of there."

"Lindersto," Sunny said. She meant "That'll be tough.  We'll have to
wander around the hospital looking for her, while other people will be
wandering around the hospital, looking for us."

"I know," Klaus said glumly. "If anyone recognizes us from The Daily
Punctilio, we'll be in jail before we can help Violet."

"Disguise?" Sunny said.

"I don't know how," Klaus said, looking around the half-finished room.
"All we have here is some flashlights and a few dropcloths. I suppose
if we wrapped the dropcloths around us and put the flashlights on top
of our heads, we could try to disguise ourselves as piles of
construction materials."

"Gidoost," Sunny said, which meant "But piles of construction
materials don't wander around hospitals."

"Then we'll have to walk into the hospital without disguises," Klaus
said. "We'll just have to be extra careful."

Sunny nodded emphatically, a word which here means "as if she thought
being extra careful was a very good plan," and Klaus nodded
emphatically back. But as they left the half-finished wing of the
hospital, the two children felt less and less emphatic about what they
were doing. Ever since that terrible day at the beach when Mr.  Poe
brought them news of the fire, all three Baudelaires had been extra
careful all of the time. They had been extra careful when they lived
with Count Olaf, and Sunny had still ended up dangling from a cage
outside Olaf's tower room. They had been extra careful when they'd
worked at the Lucky Smells Lumbermill, and Klaus had still ended up
hypnotized by Dr. Orwell. And now the Baudelaires had been as careful
as they could possibly be, but the hospital had turned out to be as
hostile an environment as anywhere the three children had ever lived.
But just as Klaus and Sunny entered the finished half of Heimlich
Hospital, their feet moving less and less emphatically and their
hearts beating faster and faster, they heard something that soothed
their savage breasts:


"We are Volunteers Fighting Disease,

And we're cheerful all day long.

If someone said that we were sad,

That person would be wrong."


There, coming around the corner, were the Volunteers Fighting Disease,
walking down the hall singing their cheerful song and carrying
enormous bunches of heart-shaped balloons. Klaus and Sunny looked at
one another, and ran to catch up with the group. What better place to
hide than among people who believed that no news was good news, and so
didn't read the newspaper?


"We visit people who are sick,

And try to make them smile,

Even if their noses bleed,

Or if they cough up bile."


To the children's relief, the volunteers paid no attention as Klaus
and Sunny infiltrated the group, a phrase which here means "sneaked
into the middle of a singing crowd." An especially cheerful singer
seemed to be the only one who noticed, and she immediately handed a
balloon to each newcomer. Klaus and Sunny held the balloons in front
of their faces, so that anybody passing by would see two volunteers
with shiny, helium-filled hearts, instead of two accused criminals
hiding in V.F.D.


"Tra la la, Fiddle dee dee,

Hope you get well soon.

Ho ho ho, hee hee hee,

Have a heart-shaped balloon."


As the volunteers reached the chorus of the song, they marched into a
hospital room in order to start giving a cheerful attitude to the
patients. Inside the room, each lying uncomfortably in a metal bed,
were a man with both legs in casts and a woman with both arms in
bandages. Still singing, a man from V.F.D. handed one balloon to the
man and tied another to the woman's cast, because she could not hold
it with her broken arms.

"Excuse me," said the man hoarsely, "could you please call a nurse for
me? I was supposed to take some painkillers this morning, but nobody
has come to give them to me."

"And I'd like a glass of water," the woman said in a weak voice, "if
it's not too much trouble."

"Sorry," the bearded man replied, pausing for a moment to tune his
guitar. "We don't have time to do things like that. We have to visit
each and every room of the hospital, so we need to move quickly."

"Besides," another volunteer said, giving the two patients a huge
grin, "a cheerful attitude is a more effective way of fighting illness
than painkillers, or a glass of water. So cheer up, and enjoy your
balloon." The volunteer consulted a list he was holding. "Next on the
patient list is a man named Bernard Rieux, in room 105 of the Plague
Ward. Come on, brothers and sisters."

The members of V.F.D. cheered, and continued the song as they left the
room. Klaus and Sunny peered around the balloons they were holding and
looked at one another in hope.

"If we visit each and every room in the hospital," Klaus whispered to
his sister, "we're sure to find Violet."

"Mushulm," Sunny said, which meant "I agree, although it won't be
pleasant to see all these sick people."

"We visit people who are ill, And try to make them laugh, Even when
the doctor says He must saw them in half."

Bernard Rieux turned out to be a man with a nasty, hacking cough that
shook his body so much he could scarcely hold his balloon, and it
seemed to the two Baudelaire children that a good humidifier would
have been a more effective way to fight this disease than a cheerful
attitude. As the members of V.F.D. drowned out his cough with another
verse of the song, Klaus and Sunny were tempted to run and find a
humidifier and bring it back to Bernard Rieux's room, but they knew
that Violet was in much more danger than someone with a cough, so they
stayed hidden in the group.


"We sing and sing all night and day,

And then we sing some more.

We sing to boys with broken bones

And girls whose throats are sore."


The next patient on the list was Cynthia Vane, a young woman with a
terrible toothache who probably would have preferred something cold
and easy to eat, instead of a heartshaped balloon, but as sore as her
mouth looked, the children dared not run and find her applesauce or an
ice-cream snack. They knew she might have read The Daily Punctilio, in
order to pass the hours in the hospital room, and might recognize them
if they showed their faces.


"Tra la la, Fiddle dee dee,

Hope you get well soon.

Ho ho ho, hee hee hee,

Have a heart-shaped balloon."


On and on the volunteers marched, and Klaus and Sunny marched with
them, but with every ho ho ho and hee hee hee their hearts sank lower
and lower. The two Baudelaires followed the members of V.F.D. up and
down the staircases of the hospital, and although they saw a great
number of confusing maps, intercom speakers, and sick people, they did
not catch a glimpse of their sister. They visited Room 201 and sang to
Jonah Mapple, who was suffering from seasickness, and they gave a
heart-shaped balloon to Charley Anderson in Room 714, who had injured
himself in an accident, and they visited Clarissa Dalloway, who did
not seem to have anything wrong with her but was staring sadly out the
window of Room 1308, but nowhere, in any of the rooms that the
volunteers marched into, was Violet Baudelaire, who, Klaus and Sunny
feared, was suffering more than any of the other patients.

"Ceyune," Sunny said, as the volunteers walked up yet another
staircase. She meant something along the lines of "We've been
wandering around the hospital all morning, and we're no closer to
rescuing our sister," and Klaus nodded grimly in agreement.

"I know," Klaus said, "but the members of V.F.D. are going to visit
every single person in Heimlich Hospital. We're sure to find Violet
eventually."

"Attention! Attention!" a voice announced, and the volunteers stopped
singing and gathered around the nearest intercom speaker to hear what
Mattathias had to say. "Attention!" Mattathias said. "Today is a very
important day in the history of the hospital.  In precisely one hour,
a doctor here will perform the world's first cranioectomy on a
fourteen-year-old girl. We all hope that this very dangerous operation
is a complete success. That is all."

"Violet," Sunny murmured to her brother.

"I think so, too," Klaus said. "And I don't like the sound of that
operation. 'Cranio' means 'head and 'ectomy' is a medical term for
removing something."

"Decap?" Sunny asked in a horrified whisper. She meant something like
"Do you think they're going to cut off Violet's head?"

"I don't know," Klaus said with a shudder, "but we can't wander around
with these singing volunteers any longer. We've got to find her right
away."

"O.K.," a volunteer called, consulting the list. "The next patient is
Emma Bovary in Room 2611. She has food poisoning, so she needs a
particularly cheerful attitude."

"Excuse me, brother," Klaus said to the volunteer, reluctantly using
the term "brother" instead of "person I hardly know." "I was wondering
if I could borrow your copy of the patient list."

"Of course," the volunteer replied. "I don't like to read all these
names of sick people, anyway. It's too depressing. I'd rather hold
balloons." With a cheerful smile, the volunteer handed Klaus the long
list of patients, and took the heart-shaped balloon out of his hands
as the bearded man began the next verse of the song.


"We sing to men with measles,

And to women with the flu,

And if you breathe in deadly germs,

We'll probably sing to you."


With his face exposed, Klaus had to duck down behind Sunny's balloon
to look at the list of the hospital's patients. "There are hundreds of
people on this list," he said to his sister, "and it's organized by
ward, not by name. We can't read it all here in the hallway,
particularly when we both have to hide behind one balloon."

"Damajat," Sunny said, pointing down the hall. By "Damajat," she meant
something along the lines of "Let's hide in that supply closet over
there," and sure enough, there was a door marked "Supply Closet" at
the end of the hallway, past two doctors who had paused to chat beside
one of the confusing maps. While the members of V.F.D. started in on
the chorus of their song as they walked toward Emma Bovary's room,
Klaus and Sunny separated themselves from the volunteers and walked
carefully toward the closet, holding the balloon in front of both
their faces as best they could. Luckily, the two doctors were too busy
talking about a sporting event they had watched on television to
notice two accused murderers sneaking down the hallway of their
hospital, and by the time the volunteers were singing


"Tra la la, Fiddle dee dee,

Hope you get well soon.

Ho ho ho, hee hee hee,

Have a heart-shaped balloon."

Klaus and Sunny were inside the closet.


Like a church bell, a coffin, and a vat of melted chocolate, a supply
closet is rarely a comfortable place to hide, and this supply closet
was no exception. When they shut the door of the closet behind them,
the two younger Baudelaires found themselves in a small, cramped room
lit only by one flickering lightbulb hanging from the ceiling. On one
wall was a row of white medical coats hanging from hooks, and on the
opposite wall was a rusty sink where one could wash one's hands before
examining a patient. The rest of the closet was full of huge cans of
alphabet soup for patients' lunches, and small boxes of rubber bands,
which the children could not imagine came in very handy in a hospital.

"Well," Klaus said, "it's not comfortable, but at least nobody will
find us in here."

"Pesh," Sunny said, which meant something like "At least, until
somebody needs rubber bands, alphabet soup, white medical coats, or
clean hands."

"Well, let's keep one eye on the door, to see if anyone comes in,"
Klaus said, "but let's keep the other eye on this list. It's very
long, but now that we have a few moments to look it over, we should be
able to spot Violet's name."

"Right," Sunny said. Klaus placed the list on top of a can of soup,
and hurriedly began to flip through its pages. As he had noticed, the
list of patients was not organized alphabetically, but by ward, a word
which here means "particular section of the hospital," so the two
children had to look through every single page, hoping to spot the
name Violet Baudelaire among the typed names of sick people. But as
they glanced at the list under the heading "Sore Throat Ward," perused
the names on the "Broken Neck Ward" page, and combed through the names
of all the people who were staying in the Ward for People with Nasty
Rashes, Klaus and Sunny felt as if they were in a Ward for People with
Sinking Stomachs, because Violet's name was nowhere to be found. As
the lightbulb flickered above them, the two Baudelaires looked
frantically at page after page of the list, but they found nothing
that would help them locate their sister.

"She's not here," Klaus said, putting down the last page of "Pneumonia
Ward." "Violet's name is nowhere on the list. How are we going to find
her in this huge hospital, if we can't figure out what ward she's in?"

"Alias," Sunny said, which meant "Maybe she's listed under a different
name."

"That's true," Klaus said, looking at the list again.  "After all,
Mattathias's real name is Count Olaf. Maybe he made up a new name for
Violet, so we couldn't rescue her. But which person is really Violet?
She could be anyone from Mikhail Bulgakov to Haruki Murakami. What are
we going to do? Somewhere in this hospital, they're getting ready to
perform a completely unnecessary operation on our sister, and we-"

Klaus was interrupted by the sound of crackly laughter, coming from
over the Baudelaires' heads. The two children looked up and saw that a
square intercom speaker had been installed on the ceiling.
"Attention!" said Mattathias, when he was done laughing.  "Dr.
Flacutono, please report to the Surgical Ward. Dr. Flacutono, please
report to the Surgical Ward to prepare for the cranioectomy."

"Flacutono!" Sunny repeated.

"I recognize that name, too," Klaus said. "That's the false name used
by Count Olaf's associate when we lived in Paltryville."

"Tiofreck!" Sunny said frantically. She meant "Violet's in grave
danger-we have to find her immediately," but Klaus did not answer.
Behind his glasses, his eyes were half closed, as they often were when
he was trying to remember something he had read.  "Flacutono," he
muttered quietly. "Flac-u-to-no." Then he reached into his pocket,
where he was keeping all the important papers the Baudelaires had
gathered. "Al Funcoot," he said, and took out one of the pages of the
Quagmire notebooks. It was the page that had written on it the words
"Ana Gram"-a phrase that had not made any sense to the Baudelaires
when they had looked at the pages together. Klaus looked at the
Quagmire page, and then at the list of patients, and then at the page
again. Then he looked at Sunny, and she could see his eyes grow wide
behind his glasses, the way they always did when he had read something
very difficult, and understood it at last.

"I think I know how to find Violet," Klaus said slowly, "but we'll
need your teeth, Sunny."

"Ready," Sunny said, opening her mouth.

Klaus smiled, and pointed to the stack of cans in the supply closet.
"Open one of those cans of alphabet soup," he said, "and hurry."


CHAPTER NINE

"Recazier?" Sunny asked dumbfoundedly. The word "dumbfoundedly" here
means "wondering why in the world Klaus wanted to eat alphabet soup at
a time like this," and "Recazier?" here means "Klaus, why in the world
do you want to eat alphabet soup at a time like this?"

"We're not going to eat it," Klaus said, handing Sunny one of the
cans. "We're going to pour just about all of it down the sink."

"Pietrisycamollaviadelrechiotemexity," Sunny said, which you will
probably recall means something along the lines of "I must admit I
don't have the faintest idea of what is going on." Sunny had now said
this particular thing three times over the course of her life, and she
was beginning to wonder if this was something she was only going to
say more and more as she grew older.

"The last time you said that," Klaus said with a smile, "the three of
us were trying to figure out the pages the Quagmires left behind." He
held out a page for Sunny to see, and then pointed to the words "Ana
Gram." "We thought this was someone's name," Klaus said, "but it's
really a kind of code. An anagram is when you move the letters around
in one or more words to make another word or words."

"Still pietrisycamollaviadelrechiotemexity," Sunny said with a sigh.

"I'll give you an example," Klaus said. "It's the example the
Quagmires found. Look, on the same page they wrote 'Al Funcoot.'
That's the name of the man who wrote The Marvelous Marriage, that
dreadful play Count Olaf forced us to participate in."

"Yuck," Sunny said, which meant "Don't remind me."

"But look," Klaus said. "'Al Funcoot' has all the same letters as
'Count Olaf.' Olaf just rearranged the letters in his name to hide the
fact that he really wrote the play himself. You see?"

"Phromein," Sunny said, which meant something like "I think I
understand, but it's difficult for someone as young as myself."

"It's difficult for me, too," Klaus said. "That's why the alphabet
soup will come in handy. Count Olaf uses anagrams when he wants to
hide something, and right now he's hiding our sister. I bet she's
somewhere on this list, but her name's been scrambled up. The soup is
going to help unscramble her."

"But how?" Sunny asked.

"It's difficult to figure out anagrams if you can't move the letters
around," Klaus said. "Normally, alphabet blocks or lettered tiles
would be perfect, but alphabet noodles will do in a pinch. Now, hurry
and open a can of soup." Sunny grinned, showing all of her sharp sharp
teeth, and then swung her head down onto the can of soup, remembering
the day she had learned to open cans all by herself.  It was not that
long ago, although it felt like it was in the very distant past,
because it was before the Baudelaire mansion burned down, when the
entire family was happy and together. It was the Baudelaires' mother's
birthday, and she was sleeping late while everyone baked a cake for
her. Violet was beating the eggs, butter, and sugar with a mixing
device she had invented herself. Klaus was sifting the flour with the
cinnamon, pausing every few minutes to wipe his glasses. And the
Baudelaires' father was making his famous cream- cheese frosting,
which would be spread thickly on top of the cake. All was going well
until the electric can opener broke, and Violet didn't have the proper
tools to fix it. The Baudelaires' father desperately needed to open a
can of condensed milk to make his frosting, and for a moment it looked
like the cake was going to be ruined. But Sunny-who had been playing
quietly on the floor this whole time-said her first word, "Bite," and
bit down on the can, poking four small holes so the sweet, thick milk
could pour out. The Baudelaires laughed and applauded, and the
children's mother came downstairs, and from then on they used Sunny
whenever they needed to open a can of anything, except for beets. Now,
as the youngest Baudelaire bit along the edge of the can of alphabet
soup, she wondered if one of her parents had really survived the fire,
and if she dared get her hopes up just because of one sentence on page
thirteen of the Snicket file. Sunny wondered if the Baudelaire family
would ever be together again, laughing and clapping and working
together to make something sweet and delicious.

"All done," Sunny said finally.

"Good work, Sunny," Klaus said. "Now, let's try to find alphabet
noodles that spell Violet's name."

"V?" Sunny asked.

"That's right," Klaus said. "V-I-O-L-E-T-B-A-U- D-E-L-A-I-R-E."

The two younger Baudelaires reached into the can of soup and sorted
through the diced carrots, chopped celery, blanched potatoes, roasted
peppers, and steamed peas, which were all in a rich and creamy broth
made from a secret blend of herbs and spices, to find the noodles they
needed. The soup was cold from sitting in the closet for months and
months, and occasionally they would find the right letter only to have
it fall into pieces, or slip from their clammy fingers back into the
can, but before too long they had found a V, an I, an O, an L, an E, a
T, a B, an A, a U, a D, another E, another L, another A, another I, an
R, and a bit of carrot they decided to use when a third E was not to
be found.

"Now," Klaus said, after they laid all of the noodles on top of
another can so they could move them around. "Let's take another look
at the list of patients. Mattathias announced that the operation would
take place in the Surgical Ward, so let's look in that section of the
list, and try to see if any names look like good bets."

Sunny poured the rest of soup into the sink and nodded in agreement,
and Klaus hurriedly found the Surgical Ward section of the list and
read the names of the patients:

LISA N. LOOTNDAY

ALBERT E. DEVILOEIA

LINDA RHALDEEN

ADA O. U"BERVILLET

ED VALIANTBRUE

LAURA V. BLEEDIOTIE

MONTY KENSICLE

NED H. RIRGER

ERIQ BLUTHETTS

RUTH DE"RCROUMP

AL BRISNOW

CARRIE E. ABELABUDITE

"Goodness!" Klaus said. "Every single patient on the list has a name
that looks like an anagram. How in the world can we sort through all
these names before it's too late?"

"V!" Sunny said.

"You're right," Klaus said. "Any name that doesn't have a V in it
can't be an anagram of 'Violet Baudelaire.' We could cross those off
the list-if we had a pen, that is."

Sunny reached thoughtfully into one of the white medical coats,
wondering what doctors might keep in their pockets. She found a
surgical mask, which is perfect for covering one's face, and a pair of
rubber gloves, that are perfect for protecting one's hands, and at the
very bottom of the pocket she found a ballpoint pen, which is perfect
for crossing out names which aren't the anagrams you're looking for.
With a grin, Sunny handed the pen to Klaus, who quickly crossed out
the names without Vs. Now the list looked like this:


LISA N. LOOTNDAY

ALBERT E. DEVILOEIA

#LINDA RHALDEEN

ADA O. UUBERVILLET

ED VALIANTBRUE

LAURA V. BLEEDIOTIE

#MONTY KENSICLE

#NED H. RIRGER

#ERIQ BLUTHETTS

#RUTH DERCROUMP

#AL BRISNOW

#CARRIE E. ABELABUDITE


"That makes it much easier," Klaus said. "Now, let's move around the
letters in Violet's name and see if we can spell out 'Albert E.
Deviloeia.'"

Working carefully to avoid breaking them, Klaus began to move the
noodles he and Sunny had taken out of the soup, and soon learned that
'Albert E. Deviloeia' and "Violet Baudelaire" were not quite anagrams.
They were close, but they did not have the exact same letters in their
names.

"Albert E. Deviloeia must be an actual sick person," Klaus said in
disappointment. "Let's try to spell out 'Ada O.  U"bervillet.'"

Once again, the supply closet was filled with the sound of shifting
noodles, a faint and damp sound that made the children think of
something slimy emerging from a swamp. It was, however, a far nicer
sound than the one that interrupted their anagram decoding.

"Attention! Attention!" Mattathias's voice sounded particularly snide
as it called for attention from the square speaker over the
Baudelaires' heads. "The Surgical Ward will now be closed for the
cranioectomy. Only Dr. Flacutono and his associates will be allowed
into the ward until the patient is dead-I mean, until the operation is
over. That is all."

"Velocity!" Sunny shrieked.

"I know we have to hurry!" Klaus cried. "I'm moving these noodles as
quickly as I can! Ada O. U"bervillet isn't right, either!" He turned
to the list of patients again to see who was next, and accidentally
hit a noodle with his elbow, knocking it to the floor with a moist
splat. Sunny picked it up for him, but the fall had split it into two
pieces. Instead of an O, the Baudelaires now had a pair of
parentheses.

"That's O.K.," Klaus said hurriedly. "The next name on the list is Ed
Valiantbrue, which doesn't have an O in it anyway."

"O!" Sunny shrieked.

"O!" Klaus agreed.

"O!" Sunny insisted.

"Oh!" Klaus cried. "I see what you mean! If it doesn't have an O in
it, it can't be an anagram of Violet Baudelaire. That only leaves one
name on the list: Laura V. Bleediotie. That must be the one we're
looking for."

"Check!" Sunny said, and held her breath as Klaus moved the noodles
around. In a few seconds, the name of the eldest Baudelaire sister had
been transformed into Laura V. Bleediotie, except for the O, which
Sunny still held in pieces in her tiny fist, and the last E, which was
still a piece of carrot.

"It's her, all right," Klaus said, with a grin of triumph. "We've
found Violet."

"Asklu," Sunny said, which meant "We never would have found her if you
hadn't figured out that Olaf was using anagrams."

"It was really the Quagmire triplets who figured it out," Klaus said,
holding up the notebook page, "and it was you who opened the cans of
soup, which made it much easier. But before we congratulate ourselves,
let's rescue our sister." Klaus took a look at the list of patients.
"We'll find 'Laura V. Bleediotie' in Room 922 of the Surgical Ward."

"Gwito," Sunny pointed out, which meant "But Mattathias closed the
Surgical Ward."

"Then we'll have to open it," Klaus said grimly, and took a good look
around the supply closet. "Let's put on those white medical coats," he
said. "Maybe if we look like doctors, we can get into the ward. We can
use these surgical masks in the pocket to hide our faces-just like
Olaf's associate did at the lumbermill."

"Quagmire," Sunny said doubtfully, which meant "When the Quagmires
used disguises, they didn't fool Olaf."

"But when Olaf used disguises," Klaus said, "he fooled everyone."

"Us," Sunny said.

"Except us," Klaus agreed, "but we don't have to fool ourselves."

"True," Sunny said, and reached for two white coats.  Because most
doctors are adults, the white coats were far too big for the children,
who were reminded of the enormous pinstripe suits Esme' Squalor had
purchased for them when she had been their guardian. Klaus helped
Sunny roll up the sleeves of her coat, and Sunny helped Klaus tie his
mask around his face, and in a few moments the children were finished
putting on their disguises.

"Let's go," Klaus said, and put his hand on the door of the supply
closet. But he did not open it. Instead he turned back to his sister,
and the two Baudelaires looked at each other. Even though the siblings
were wearing white coats, and had surgical masks on their faces, they
did not look like doctors. They looked like two children in white
coats with surgical masks on their faces. Their disguises looked
spurious-a word which here means "nothing at all like a real
doctor"-and yet they were no more spurious than the disguises that
Olaf had been using since his first attempt to steal the Baudelaire
fortune. Klaus and Sunny looked at one another and hoped that Olaf's
methods would work for them, and help them steal their sister, and
without another word, they opened the door and stepped out of the
supply closet.

"Douth?" Sunny asked, which meant "But how are we going to find the
Surgical Ward, when the maps of this hospital are so confusing?"

"We'll have to find someone who is going there," Klaus said. "Look for
somebody who looks like they're on their way to the Surgical Ward."

"Silata," Sunny said. She meant something along the lines of "But
there are so many people here," and she was right.  Although the
Volunteers Fighting Disease were nowhere to be seen, the hallways of
Heimlich Hospital were full of people. A hospital needs many different
people and many different types of equipment in order to work
properly, and as Klaus and Sunny tried to find the Surgical Ward they
saw all sorts of hospital employees and devices hurrying through the
halls. There were physicians carrying stethoscopes, hurrying to listen
to people's heartbeats, and there were obstetricians carrying babies,
hurrying to deliver people's children.  There were radiologists
carrying X-ray machines, hurrying to view people's insides, and there
were optic surgeons carrying laser-driven technology hurrying to get
inside people's views. There were nurses carrying hypodermic needles,
hurrying to give people shots, and there were administrators carrying
clipboards, hurrying to catch up on important paperwork. But no matter
where the Baudelaires looked, they couldn't see anyone who seemed to
be hurrying to the Surgical Ward.

"I don't see any surgeons," Klaus said in desperation.

"Peipix," Sunny said, which meant "Me neither."

"Out of my way, everybody!" demanded a voice at the end of the
hallway. "I'm a surgical assistant, carrying equipment for Dr.
Flacutono!"

The other employees of the hospital stopped and cleared the way for
the person who had spoken, a tall person dressed in a white lab coat
and a surgical mask who was coming down the hallway in odd, tottering
steps.

"I've got to get to the Surgical Ward right away!" the person called,
walking past the Baudelaires without even glancing at them. But Klaus
and Sunny glanced at this person. They saw, beneath the bottom hem of
the white coat, the pair of shoes with stiletto heels that this person
was wearing, and they saw the handbag in the shape of an eye that the
person was holding in one hand. The children saw the black veil of the
person's hat, which was hanging in front of the surgical mask, and
they saw blotches of lipstick, which had soaked through from the
person's lips and were staining the bottom of the mask. The person, of
course, was pretending to be a surgical assistant, and she was
carrying something that was pretending to be a piece of surgical
equipment, but the children did not need more than a glance to see
through both of these spurious disguises. As they watched the person
tottering down the hallway, the two Baudelaires knew at once that she
was really Esme' Squalor, the villainous girlfriend of Count Olaf. And
as they looked at the thing she was carrying, glinting in the light of
the hospital hallway, the two Baudelaires knew that it was nothing
more than a large rusty knife, with a long row of jagged teeth, just
perfect for a cranioectomy.


CHAPTER TEN

At this point in the dreadful story I am writing, I must interrupt for
a moment and describe something that happened to a good friend of mine
named Mr. Sirin. Mr. Sirin was a lepidopterist, a word which usually
means "a person who studies butterflies."

In this case, however, the word "lepidopterist" means "a man who was
being pursued by angry government officials," and on the night I am
telling you about they were right on his heels. Mr.  Sirin looked back
to see how close they were-four officers in their brightpink uniforms,
with small flashlights in their left hands and large nets in their
right-and realized that in a moment they would catch up, and arrest
him and his six favorite butterflies, which were frantically flapping
alongside him. Mr. Sirin did not care much if he was captured-he had
been in prison four and a half times over the course of his long and
complicated life-but he cared very much about the butterflies. He
realized that these six delicate insects would undoubtedly perish in
bug prison, where poisonous spiders, stinging bees, and other
criminals would rip them to shreds. So, as the secret police closed
in, Mr. Sirin opened his mouth as wide as he could and swallowed all
six butterflies whole, quickly placing them in the dark but safe
confines of his empty stomach. It was not a pleasant feeling to have
these six insects living inside him, but Mr. Sirin kept them there for
three years, eating only the lightest foods served in prison so as not
to crush the insects with a clump of broccoli or a baked potato. When
his prison sentence was over, Mr. Sirin burped up the grateful
butterflies and resumed his lepidoptery work in a community that was
much more friendly to scientists and their specimens. I am telling you
this story not just to reveal the courage and imagination of one of my
dearest friends, but to help you imagine how Klaus and Sunny felt as
they watched Esme' Squalor, disguised as an associate of Dr.
Flacutono, walk down the hallway of Heimlich Hospital carrying the
long, rusty knife disguised as a surgical tool to be used on Violet.
The two youngsters realized that their only chance of finding the
Surgical Ward and rescuing their sister was to try and fool this
greedy and stiletto heeled villain, but as they approached her, like
Mr. Sirin during his fifth and final prison sentence, the two
Baudelaires felt the unpleasant fluttering of butterflies in their
stomachs.

"Excuse me, ma'am," Klaus said, trying to sound less like a
thirteen-year-old boy and more like someone who had graduated from
medical school. "Did you say you were an associate of Dr.  Flacutono?"

"If you're someone with a hearing problem," Esme' said rudely, "don't
bother me. Go to the Ear Ward."

"I'm not someone with a hearing problem," Klaus said.  "This woman and
I are associates of Dr. Flacutono."

Esme' stopped in the middle of stabbing the floor, and stared down at
the two siblings. Klaus and Sunny could see her eyes shining behind
the veil of her fashionable hat as she regarded the children before
replying.

"I was just wondering where you were," she said. "Come along with me,
and I'll take you to the patient."

"Patsy," Sunny said.

"What she is saying," Klaus said quickly, "is that we're very
concerned about Laura V. Bleediotie."


"Well, you won't be concerned for long," Esme' replied, leading the
children around a corner to another hallway.  "Here, you carry the
knife."

The evil girlfriend handed Klaus the rusty blade, and leaned in
closely to talk with him. "I'm glad you two are here," she whispered.
"The brat's little brother and sister haven't been captured yet, and
we still don't have the file on the Snicket fires. The authorities
removed it for their investigation. The boss says we might have to
torch the place."

"Torch?" Sunny asked.

"Mattathias will take care of that part," Esme' said, looking around
the hallway to make sure no one could hear them. "All you have to do
is assist with the surgery. Let's hurry up."

Esme' walked up a stairway as fast as her shoes could carry her, and
the children followed nervously behind her, Klaus holding the rusty,
jagged knife. With every door they opened, every hallway they walked
down, and every staircase they ascended, the youngsters were afraid
that at any moment Esme' would see through their disguises and realize
who they were. But the greedy woman was too busy pausing to yank the
blades of the stiletto heels out of the floor to notice that the two
additional associates of Dr. Flacutono bore a very strong resemblance
to the children she was trying to capture. Finally, Esme' led the
Baudelaires to a door marked "Surgical Ward," which was being guarded
by someone the children recognized at once. The guard was wearing a
coat which read "Heimlich Hospital " and a cap that had the word
"GUARD" printed on it in big black print, but Klaus and Sunny could
see that this was another spurious disguise. The siblings had seen
this person at Damocles Dock, when poor Aunt Josephine had been their
guardian, and they'd had to cook for this person when they'd been
living with Count Olaf. The spurious guard was an enormous person who
looked like neither a man nor a woman, and who had been assisting
Count Olaf with his nefarious schemes for as long as the Baudelaires
had been escaping from them. The person looked at the children, and
the children look back at him or her, certain that they would be
recognized. But Olaf's assistant merely nodded and opened the door.

"They've already anesthetized the bratty orphan," Esme' said, "so you
ladies merely need to go to her room and bring her to the operating
theater. I'm going to try to find that sniveling bookworm and that
stupid baby with the oversized teeth. Mattathias says I get to choose
which one to keep alive in order to force Mr. Poe to give us the
fortune, and which one I get to rip to shreds."

"Good," Klaus said, trying to sound fierce and villainous. "I'm so
tired of chasing those kids around."

"Me, too," Esme' said, and the enormous assistant nodded in agreement.
"But I'm sure this will be the last time. Once we've destroyed the
file, nobody can accuse us of any crimes, and once we murder the
orphans, the fortune will be ours."

The villainous woman paused and looked around her to make sure no one
was listening, and then, satisfied that no one could hear her, she
laughed wildly in triumph. The enormous assistant laughed, too, an odd
laugh that sounded like a squeal and a howl at the same time, and the
two Baudelaire youngsters tilted back their masked faces and made
noises as if they were laughing, too, although their laughter was as
spurious as their disguises. Klaus and Sunny felt more like being sick
than laughing as they pretended to be as greedy and evil as Count Olaf
and his troupe. It had never occurred to the children how these
terrible people acted when they didn't have to pretend to be nice, and
the two siblings were horrified to hear all the bloodthirsty things
Esme' had said. Watching Esme' and the enormous assistant laugh
together made the butterflies in the Baudelaire stomachs flutter all
the more, and the youngsters were relieved when Esme' finally stopped
laughing, and ushered the children into the Surgical Ward.

"I'll leave you ladies in the hands of our associates," she said, and
the Baudelaires immediately saw with horror what she meant. Esme' shut
the door behind them, and the children found themselves facing two
more of Count Olaf's wicked associates.

"Well, hello there," the first one said in a sinister voice, pointing
at the two children with an odd-looking hand. One of the fingers was
curved at an odd angle while the others hung limp, like socks hung out
to dry, and Klaus and Sunny could see at once that this was the
associate of Olaf who had hooks instead of hands, wearing rubber
gloves to hide his unusual and dangerous appendages. Behind him was a
man whose hands were not as familiar, but Klaus and Sunny recognized
him just as easily, due to the hideous wig he was wearing on his head.
The wig was so limp, white, and curly that it looked like a heap of
dead worms, which is not the sort of wig one forgets. The children had
certainly not forgotten it from when they had been living in
Paltryville, and realized at once that this person was the bald man
with the long nose who had been assisting Count Olaf since the
Baudelaires' troubles began. The hook-handed man and the bald man with
the long nose were among the nastiest members of Olaf's troupe, but
unlike the majority of nasty people of this earth, they were also
quite clever, and the two young siblings felt the butterfly feeling in
their stomachs increase exponentially-a phrase which here means "get
much, much worse"-as they waited to see if these two associates were
clever enough to see through the children's disguises.

"I can see through your disguise," the hook-handed man continued, and
placed one of his spurious hands on Klaus's shoulder.

"Me, too," the bald man said, "but I don't think anyone else will. I
don't know how you ladies managed to do it, but you look much shorter
in those white coats."

"And your faces don't look as pale in those surgical masks," the
hook-handed man agreed. "These are the best disguises Olaf-I mean
Mattathias-has ever cooked up."

"We don't have time for all this talking," Klaus said, hoping that the
associates wouldn't recognize his voice, either.  "We've got to get to
Room 922 right away."

"You're right, of course," the hook-handed man said.  "Follow us."

The two associates began walking down the hallway of the Surgical Ward
as Klaus and Sunny looked at one another in relief.

"Gwit," Sunny murmured, which meant "They didn't recognize us either."

"I know," Klaus replied in a whisper. "They think we're the two
powder-faced women, disguised as associates of Dr.  Flacutono, instead
of two children disguised as the two powder-faced women disguised as
associates of Dr. Flacutono."

"Stop all that whispering about disguises," the bald man said. "If
anyone hears you, it'll be the end of us."

"Instead of the end of Laura V. Bleediotie," the hook- handed man said
with a sneer. "I've been waiting to get hooks on her since she escaped
from marrying Mattathias."

"Trapped," Sunny said, sneering as best she could.

"Trapped is right," the bald man said. "I already gave her the
anesthetic, so she's unconscious. All we have to do is lead her to the
operating theater, and you can saw her head off."

"I still don't understand why we have to murder her in front of all
those doctors," the hook-handed man said.

"So it can look like an accident, you idiot," the bald man snarled in
reply.

"I'm not an idiot," the hook-handed man said, stopping to glare at his
fellow associate. "I'm physically handicapped."

"Just because you're physically handicapped doesn't mean you're
mentally clever," the bald man said.

"And just because you're wearing an ugly wig," the hook-handed man
said, "doesn't mean you can insult me."

"Stop all this arguing!" Klaus said. "The sooner we can operate on
Laura V. Bleediotie, the sooner we'll all be rich."

"Yes!" Sunny said.

The two criminals looked down at the Baudelaires, and then nodded at
one another sheepishly. "The ladies are right," the hook-handed man
said. "We shouldn't behave unprofessionally, just because it's been a
very stressful time at work."

"I know," the bald man said with a sigh. "It seems like we've been
following these three orphans forever, only to have them slip out of
our grasp at the last minute. Let's just focus on getting the job
done, and work out our personal problems later. Well, here we are."

The four disguised people had reached the end of a hallway and were
standing in front of a door marked "Room 922," with the name "Laura V.
Bleediotie" scrawled on a piece of paper and taped beneath. The bald
man took a key out of the pocket in his medical coat, and unlocked the
door with a triumphant grin. "Here she is," he said. "Our little
sleeping beauty."

The door opened with a long, whiny creak, and the children stepped
inside the room, which was square and small and had heavy shades over
the windows, making it quite dark inside. But even in the dim light
the children could see their sister, and they almost gasped at how
dreadful she looked.

When the bald associate had mentioned a sleeping beauty, he was
referring to a fairy tale that you have probably heard one thousand
times. Like all fairy tales, the story of Sleeping Beauty begins with
"Once upon a time," and continues with a foolish young princess who
makes a witch very angry, and then takes a nap until her boyfriend
wakes her up with a kiss and insists on getting married, at which
point the story ends with the phrase "happily ever after." The story
is usually illustrated with fancy drawings of the napping princess,
who always looks very glamorous and elegant, with her hair neatly
combed and a long silk gown keeping her comfortable as she snores away
for years and years. But when Klaus and Sunny saw Violet in Room 922,
it looked nothing like a fairy tale.

The eldest Baudelaire was lying on a gurney, which is a metal bed with
wheels, used in hospitals to move patients around.  This particular
gurney was as rusty as the knife Klaus was holding, and its sheets
were ripped and soiled. Olaf's associates had put her into a white
gown as filthy as the sheets, and had twisted her legs together like
vines. Her hair had been messily thrown over her eyes so that no one
would recognize her face from The Daily Punctilio, and her arms hung
loosely from her body, one of them almost touching the floor of the
room with one limp finger. Her face was pale, as pale and empty as the
surface of the moon, and her mouth was open slightly in a vacant
frown, as if she were dreaming of being pricked with a pin.  Violet
looked like she had dropped onto the gurney from a great height, and
if it were not for the slow and steady rise of her chest as she
breathed, it would have looked like she had not survived the fall.
Klaus and Sunny looked at her in horrified silence, trying not to cry
as they gazed at their helpless sister.

"She's a pretty one," the hook-handed man said, "even when she's
unconscious."

"She's clever, too," the bald man said, "although her clever little
brain won't do her any good when her head has been sawed off."

"Let's hurry up and go to the operating theater," the hook-handed man
said, beginning to move the gurney out of the room.  "Mattathias said
the anesthetic would last for only a little while, so we'd best start
the cranioectomy."

"I wouldn't mind if she woke up in the middle of it," the bald man
said with a giggle, "but I suppose that would ruin the plan. You
ladies take the head end. I don't like to look at her when she's
frowning like that."

"And don't forget the knife," the hook-handed man said. "Dr. Flacutono
and I will be supervising, but you two will actually perform the
operation."

The two children nodded, afraid that if they tried to speak, the two
henchmen would hear how anxious they were and become suspicious. In
silence they took their places at the gurney where their sister lay
without moving. The Baudelaires wanted to gently shake her by the
shoulders, or whisper in her ear, or even just brush the hair away
from her eyes-anything at all to help their unconscious sibling. But
the two youngsters knew that any affectionate gesture would give away
their disguise, so they just walked alongside the gurney, clutching
the rusty knife, as the two men led the way out of Room 922 and
through the halls of the Surgical Ward. With every step, Klaus and
Sunny watched their sister carefully, hoping for a sign that the
anesthesia was wearing off, but Violet's face remained as still and
blank as the sheet of paper on which I am printing this story.

Although her siblings preferred to think about her inventing abilities
and conversational skills rather than her physical appearance, it was
true, as the hook-handed man had said, that Violet was a pretty one,
and if her hair had been neatly combed, instead of all tangled up, and
she had been dressed in something elegant and glamorous, instead of a
stained gown, she might indeed have looked like an illustration from
"Sleeping Beauty." But the two younger Baudelaires did not feel like
characters in a fairy tale. The unfortunate events in their lives had
not begun with "Once upon a time," but with the terrible fire that had
destroyed their home, and as Olaf's associates led them to a square
metal door at the end of the hallway, Klaus and Sunny feared that
their lives would not end like a fairy tale either. The label on the
door read "Operating Theater," and as the hook-handed man opened it
with one curved glove, the two children could not imagine that their
story would end with "happily ever after."


CHAPTER ELEVEN

Operating theaters are not nearly as popular as dramatic theaters,
musical theaters, and movie theaters, and it is easy to see why. A
dramatic theater is a large, dark room in which actors perform a play,
and if you are in the audience, you can enjoy yourself by listening to
the dialog and looking at the costumes. A musical theater is a large,
dark room in which musicians perform a symphony, and if you are in the
audience, you can enjoy yourself by listening to the melodies and
watching the conductor wave his little stick around. And a movie
theater is a large, dark room in which a projectionist shows a film,
and if you are in the audience, you can enjoy yourself by eating
popcorn and gossiping about movie stars. But an operating theater is a
large, dark room in which doctors perform medical procedures, and if
you are in the audience, the best thing to do is to leave at once,
because there is never anything on display in an operating theater but
pain, suffering, and discomfort, and for this reason most operating
theaters have been closed down or have been turned into restaurants.

I'm sorry to say, however, that the operating theater at Heimlich
Hospital was still quite popular at the time this story takes place.
As Klaus and Sunny followed Olaf's two disguised associates through
the square metal door, they saw that the large, dark room was filled
with people.

There were rows of doctors in white coats who were clearly eager to
see a new operation being performed. There were clusters of nurses
sitting together and whispering with excitement about the world's
first cranioectomy. There was a large group of Volunteers Fighting
Disease who seemed ready to burst into song if needed. And there were
a great many people who looked like they had simply walked over to the
operating theater to see what was playing.  The four disguised people
wheeled the gurney onto a small bare stage, lit by a chandelier that
was hanging from the ceiling, and as soon as the light of the
chandelier fell on Klaus and Sunny's unconscious sister, all of the
audience members burst into cheers and applause.  The roar from the
crowd only made Klaus and Sunny even more anxious, but Olaf's two
associates stopped moving the gurney, raised their arms, and bowed
several times.

"Thank you very much!" the hook-handed man cried.  "Doctors, nurses,
Volunteers Fighting Disease, reporters from The Daily
Punctilio,distinguished guests, and regular people, welcome to the
operating theater at Heimlich Hospital. I am Dr. O. Lucafont, and I
will be your medical host for today's performance."

"Hooray for Dr. Lucafont!" a doctor cried, as the crowd burst into
applause again, and the hook-handed man raised his rubber-gloved hands
and took another bow.

"And I am Dr. Flacutono," the bald man announced, looking a bit
jealous of all the applause the hook-handed man was getting. "I am the
surgeon who invented the cranioectomy, and I am thrilled to operate
today in front of all you wonderful and attractive people."

"Hooray for Dr. Flacutono!" a nurse shouted, and the crowd applauded
again. Some of the reporters even whistled as the bald man bowed
deeply, using one hand to hold his curly wig on his head.

"The surgeon is right!" the hook-handed man said. "You are wonderful
and attractive, all of you! Go on, give yourselves a big hand!"

"Hooray for us!" a volunteer cried, and the audience applauded another
time. The two Baudelaires looked at their older sister, hoping that
the noise of the crowd would wake her up, but Violet did not move.

"Now, the two lovely ladies you see are two associates of mine named
Dr. Tocuna and Nurse Flo," the bald man continued. "Why don't you give
them the same wonderful welcome you gave us?"

Klaus and Sunny half expected someone in the crowd to shout, "They
aren't medical associates! They're those two children wanted for
murder!" but instead the crowd merely cheered once more, and the two
children found themselves waving miserably at the members of the
audience. Although the youngsters were relieved that they hadn't been
recognized, the butterflies in their stomachs only got worse as
everyone in the operating theater grew more and more eager for the
operation to begin.

"And now that you've met all of our fantastic performers," the
hook-handed man said, "let the show begin. Dr.  Flacutono, are you
ready to begin?"

"I sure am," the bald man said. "Now, ladies and gentlemen, as I'm
sure you know, a cranioectomy is a procedure in which the patient's
head is removed. Scientists have discovered that many health problems
are rooted in the brain, so that the best thing to do with a sick
patient is remove it. However, a cranioectomy is as dangerous as it is
necessary. There is a chance that Laura V.  Bleediotie might die while
the operation is being performed, but sometimes one must risk
accidents in order to cure illness."

"A patient's death would certainly be a terrible accident, Dr.
Flacutono," the hookhanded man said.

"It sure would, Dr. O. Lucafont," the bald man agreed.  "That's why
I'm going to have my associates perform the surgery, while I
supervise. Dr. Tocuna and Nurse Flo, you may begin."

The crowd applauded once more, and Olaf's associates bowed and blew
kisses to each corner of the operating theater as the two children
looked at one another in horror.

"What can we do?" Klaus murmured to his sister, looking out at the
crowd. "We're surrounded by people who expect us to saw Violet's head
off."

Sunny looked at Violet, still unconscious on the gurney, and then at
her brother, who was holding the long, rusty knife Esme' had given
him. "Stall," she said. The word "stall" has two meanings, but as with
most words with two meanings, you can figure out which meaning is
being used by looking at the situation. The word "stall," for example,
can refer to a place where horses are kept, but Klaus knew at once
that Sunny meant something more along the lines of "We'll try to
postpone the operation as long as we can, Klaus," and he nodded
silently in agreement. The middle Baudelaire took a deep breath and
closed his eyes, trying to think of something that could help him
postpone the cranioectomy, and all at once he thought of something he
had read.

When you read as many books as Klaus Baudelaire, you are going to
learn a great deal of information that might not become useful for a
long time. You might read a book that would teach you all about the
exploration of outer space, even if you do not become an astronaut
until you are eighty years old. You might read a book about how to
perform tricks on ice skates, and then not be forced to perform these
tricks for a few weeks. You might read a book on how to have a
successful marriage, when the only woman you will ever love has
married someone else and then perished one terrible afternoon. But
although Klaus had read books on outer-space exploration, ice-skating
tricks, and good marriage methods, and not yet found much use for this
information, he had learned a great deal of information that was about
to become very useful indeed.

"Before I make the first incision," Klaus said, using a fancy word for
"cut" in order to sound more like a medical professional, "I think
Nurse Flo and I should talk a little bit about the equipment we're
using."

Sunny looked at her brother quizzically. "Knife?" she asked.

"That's right," Klaus said. "It's a knife, and-"

"We all know it's a knife, Dr. Tocuna," the hook- handed man said,
smiling at the audience, as the bald man leaned in to whisper to
Klaus.

"What are you doing?" he hissed. "Just saw off the brat's head and
we'll be done."

"A real doctor would never perform a new operation without explaining
everything," Klaus whispered back. "We have to keep talking, or we'll
never fool them."

Olaf's associates looked at Klaus and Sunny for a moment, and the two
Baudelaires got ready to run, dragging Violet's gurney with them, if
they were recognized at last. But after a moment's hesitation, the two
disguised men looked at each other and nodded.

"I suppose you're right," the hook-handed man said, and then turned to
the audience. "Sorry for the delay, folks. As you know, we're real
doctors, so that's why we're explaining everything.  Carry on, Dr.
Tocuna."

"The cranioectomy will be performed with a knife," Klaus said, "which
is the oldest surgical tool in the world." He was remembering the
section on knives in A Complete History of Surgical Tools, which he
had read when he was eleven. "Early knives have been found in Egyptian
tombs and Mayan temples, where they were used for ceremonial purposes,
and mostly fashioned out of stone. Gradually bronze and iron became
the essential materials in knives, although some cultures fashioned
them out of the incisors of slain animals."

"Teeth," Sunny explained.

"There are a number of different types of knives," Klaus continued,
"including the pocket-knife, the penknife, and the drawing knife, but
the one required for this cranioectomy is a Bowie knife, named after
Colonel James Bowie, who lived in Texas."

"Wasn't that a magnificient explanation, ladies and gentlemen?" the
hook-handed man said.

"It sure was," one of the reporters agreed. She was a woman wearing a
gray suit and chewing gum as she spoke into a small microphone. "I can
see the headline now: 'DOCTOR AND NURSE EXPLAIN HISTORY OF KNIFE.'
Wait until the readers of The Daily Punctilio see that!"

The audience applauded in agreement, and as the operating theater
filled with the sound of cheers and clapping, Violet moved on her
gurney, ever so slightly. Her mouth opened a little wider, and one of
her limp hands stirred briefly. The motions were so small that only
Klaus and Sunny noticed them, and they looked at one another
hopefully. Could they keep stalling until the anesthesia completely
wore off?

"Enough talk," the bald man whispered to the children.  "It's lots of
fun fooling innocent people, but we'd better get on with the operation
before the orphan wakes up."

"Before I make the first incision," Klaus said again, continuing to
address the audience as if the bald man hadn't spoken, "I would like
to say a few words concerning rust." He paused for a moment and tried
to remember what he had learned from a book entitled What Happens to
Wet Metal, which he had received as a gift from his mother. "Rust is a
reddish-brown coating that forms on certain metals when they oxidize,
which is a scientific term for a chemical reaction occurring when iron
or steel comes into contact with moisture." He held up the rusty knife
for the audience to see, and out of the corner of his eye, he saw
Violet's hand move again, just barely. "The oxidation process is
integral to a cranioectomy due to the oxidative processes of cellular
mitochondria and cosmetic demystification," he continued, trying to
use as many complicated words as he could think of.

"Clap!" Sunny cried, and the audience applauded once more, although
not as loudly this time.

"Very impressive," the bald associate said, glaring at Klaus over his
surgical mask. "But I think these lovely people will understand the
process better once the head has actually been removed."

"Of course," Klaus replied. "But first, we need to tenderize the
vertebrae, so we can make a clean cut. Nurse Flo, will you please
nibble on Viol-I mean, on Laura V. Bleediotie's neck?"

"Yes," Sunny said with a smile, knowing just what Klaus was up to.
Standing on tiptoe, the youngest Baudelaire gave her sister a few
small nibbles on the neck, hoping that it would wake Violet up. As
Sunny's teeth scraped against her skin, Violet twitched, and shut her
mouth, but nothing more.

"What are you doing?" the hook-handed man demanded in a furious
whisper. "Perform the operation at once, or Mattathias will be
furious!"

"Isn't Nurse Flo wonderful?" Klaus asked the audience, but only a few
members of the crowd clapped, and there was not a single cheer. The
people in the operating theater were clearly eager to see some surgery
rather than hear any more explanations.

"I believe you've bitten her neck enough," the bald man said. His
voice was friendly and professional, but his eyes were gazing at the
children suspiciously. "Let's get on with the cranioectomy."

Klaus nodded, and clasped the knife in both hands, holding it up over
his helpless sister. He looked at Violet's sleeping figure and
wondered if he could made a very small cut on Violet's neck, one that
could wake her up but wouldn't injure her. He looked at the rusty
blade, which was shaking up and down as his hands trembled in fear.
And then he looked at Sunny, who had stopped nibbling on Violet's neck
and was looking up at him with wide, wide eyes.

"I can't do it," he whispered, and looked up at the ceiling. High
above them was a square intercom speaker that he had not noticed
before, and the sight of the speaker made him think of something. "I
can't do it," he announced, and there was a gasp from the crowd.

The hook-handed man took a step toward the gurney, and pointed his
limp, curved glove at Klaus. The middle Baudelaire could see the sharp
tip of his hook, poking through the finger of the glove like a sea
creature emerging from the water. "Why not?" the hook- handed man
asked quietly.

Klaus swallowed, hoping he still sounded like a medical professional
instead of a scared child. "Before I make the first incision, there's
one more thing that has to be done-the most important thing we do here
at Heimlich Hospital."

"And what is that?" the bald man asked. His surgical mask curled down
as he gave the children a sinister frown, but Sunny's mask began to
curl in the opposite direction as she realized what Klaus was talking
about, and began to smile.

"Paperwork!" she said, and to the Baudelaires' delight, the audience
began to applaud once more.

"Hooray!" called a member of V.F.D. from the back of the operating
theater, as the cheering continued. "Hooray for paperwork!"

Olaf's two associates looked at one another in frustration as the
Baudelaires looked at one another in relief.  "Hooray for paperwork
indeed!" Klaus cried. "We can't operate on a patient until her file is
absolutely complete!"

"I can't believe we forgot about it, even for a moment!" a nurse
cried. "Paperwork is the most important thing we do at this hospital!"

"I can see the headline now," said the reporter who had spoken
earlier. "'HEIMLICH HOSPITAL ALMOST FORGETS PAPERWORK!' Wait until the
readers of The Daily Punctilio see that!"

"Somebody call Hal," suggested a doctor. "He's in charge of the
Library of Records, so he can solve this paperwork problem."

"I'll call Hal right now!" announced a nurse, walking out of the
operating theater, and the crowd clapped in support of her decision.

"There's no need to call Hal," said the hook-handed man, holding up
his hooked gloves to try to calm the crowd. "The paperwork has been
taken care of, I promise you."

"But all surgical paperwork has to be verified by Hal," Klaus said.
"That's the policy of Heimlich Hospital."

The bald man glared down at the children and spoke to them in a
frightening whisper.

"What in the world are you doing?" he asked them.  "You're going to
ruin everything!"

"I think Dr. Tocuna is right," another doctor said.  "That's the
policy here."

The crowd applauded again, and Klaus and Sunny looked at one another.
The two Baudelaires, of course, had no idea what the hospital's policy
was concerning surgical paperwork, but they were beginning to see that
the crowd would believe just about anything if they thought it was
being said by a medical professional.

"Hal is on his way," the nurse announced, reentering the room.
"There's apparently been some problem at the Library of Records, but
he'll come as quickly as he can and settle this matter once and for
all."

"We don't need Hal to settle this matter once and for all," a voice
said from the far end of the theater, and the Baudelaires turned to
see the slender, tottering figure of Esme' Squalor, walking straight
toward them in her stiletto-heeled shoes, with two people trailing
dutifully behind her. These two people were both dressed in medical
coats and surgical masks just like the Baudelaires'. Klaus and Sunny
could see just a bit of their pale faces above the masks and knew at
once that they were the two powder-faced assistants of Olaf.

"This is the real Dr. Tocuna," Esme' said, pointing to one of the
women, "and this is the real Nurse Flo. The two people up on this
stage are impostors."

"No we're not," the hook-handed man said angrily.

"Not you two," Esme' said impatiently, glaring over her surgical mask
at the two henchmen. "I mean the other two people on the stage. They
fooled everyone. They fooled doctors, nurses, volunteers, reporters,
and even me-until I found the real associates of Dr. Flacutono, that
is."

"In my medical opinion," Klaus said, "I believe this woman has lost
her mind."

"I haven't lost my mind," Esme' said with a snarl, "but you're about
to lose your heads, Baudelaires."

"Baudelaires?" the reporter from The Daily Punctilio asked. "The same
Baudelaires who murdered Count Omar?"

"Olaf," the bald man corrected.

"I'm confused," whined a volunteer. "There are too many people
pretending to be other people."

"Allow me to explain," Esme' said, stepping up on the stage. "I am a
medical professional, just like Dr. Flacutono, Dr. O.  Lucafont, Dr.
Tocuna, and Nurse Flo. You can see that from our medical coats and
surgical masks."

"Us, too!" Sunny cried.

Esme''s surgical mask curled up in a wicked smile.  "Not for long,"
she said, and in one swift gesture she ripped the masks off the
Baudelaires' faces. The crowd gasped as the masks fluttered to the
ground, and the two children saw the doctors, nurses, reporters, and
regular people in the crowd look at them in horror.  Only the
Volunteers Fighting Disease, who believed that no news was good news,
did not recognize the youngsters.

"They are the Baudelaires!" a nurse exclaimed in astonishment. "I read
about them in The Daily Punctilio!"

"Me, too!" cried a doctor.

"It's always a pleasure to hear from our readers," the reporter said
modestly.

"But there were supposed to be three murderous orphans, not two!"
another doctor said. "Where's the oldest one?"

The hook-handed man hurriedly stepped in front of the gurney,
shielding Violet from view. "She's already in jail," he said quickly.

"She is not!" Klaus said, and brushed Violet's hair out of her eyes so
that everyone could see she was not Laura V.  Bleediotie. "These
terrible people disguised her as a patient, so they could cut her head
off!"

"Don't be ridiculous," Esme' said. "You're the one who was trying to
cut her head off. Look, you're still holding the knife."

"That's true!" the reporter cried. "I can see the headline now:
'murderer attempts to murder murderer.' Wait until the readers of The
Daily Punctilio see this!"

"Tweem!" Sunny shrieked.

"We're nor murderers!" Klaus translated frantically.

"If you're not murderers," the reporter said, holding out her
microphone, "then why have you sneaked into a hospital in disguise?"

"I think I can explain that," said another familiar voice, and
everyone turned to see Hal enter the operating theater. In one hand he
was clutching the ring of keys the Baudelaires had made from paper
clips and Violet's hair ribbon, and with the other hand he was
pointing angrily at the children.

"Those three Baudelaire murderers," he said, "pretended to be
volunteers in order to come to work in the Library of Records."

"They did?" a nurse said, as the audience gasped. "You mean they're
murderers and phony volunteers?"

"No wonder they didn't know the words to the song!" a volunteer cried.

"Taking advantage of my poor eyesight," Hal continued, pointing at his
glasses, "they made these fake keys and switched it with the real one,
so they could sneak into the library and destroy the files about their
crimes!"

"We didn't want to destroy the file," Klaus said, "we wanted to clear
our names. I'm sorry we tricked you, Hal, and I'm sorry that some of
the file cabinets were knocked over, but-"

"Knocked over?" Hal repeated. "You did more than knock over cabinets."
He looked at the children and sighed wearily, and then turned to face
the audience. "These children committed arson," he said. "The Library
of Records is burning as we speak."


CHAPTER TWELVE

I am alone this evening, and I am alone because of a cruel twist of
fate, a phrase which here means that nothing has happened the way I
thought it would. Once I was a content man, with a comfortable home, a
successful career, a person I loved very much, and an extremely
reliable typewriter, but all of those things have been taken away from
me, and now the only trace I have of those happy days is the tattoo on
my left ankle. As I sit in this very tiny room, printing these words
with this very large pencil, I feel as if my whole life has been
nothing but a dismal play, presented just for someone else's
amusement, and that the playwright who invented my cruel twist of fate
is somewhere far above me, laughing and laughing at his creation. It
is not pleasant to feel this way, and it is doubly unpleasant if the
cruel twist of fate happens to you when you are actually standing on a
stage and there is actually someone, far above you, laughing and
laughing, as it was with the Baudelaire children in the operating
theater of Heimlich Hospital. The children had scarcely heard Hal's
accusation that they had burned down the Library of Records when they
heard rough and familiar laughter coming out of the intercom speaker
above them. The siblings had heard this laughter when Mattathias had
first captured the Quagmire triplets, and when he had trapped the
Baudelaires in a locked Deluxe Cell. It was the triumphant laughter of
someone who has cooked up a fiendish plot and succeeded, although it
always sounded like the laughter of someone who has just told an
excellent joke. Because he was laughing over the scratchy intercom,
Mattathias sounded as if he had a piece of aluminum foil over his
mouth, but the laughter was still loud enough to help wear off the
anesthesia, and Violet murmured something and moved her arms.

"Oops," Mattathias said, interrupting his laughter as he realized the
intercom was on. "This is Mattathias, the Head of Human Resources,
with an important announcement. There is a terrible fire in Heimlich
Hospital. The fire was set in the Library of Records by the Baudelaire
murderers, and has spread to the Sore Throat Ward, the Stubbed Toe
Ward, and the Accidentally Swallowed Something You Shouldn't Have
Ward. The orphans are still at large, so do everything you can to find
them. After the murdering arsonists have been captured, you might want
to rescue some of the patients who are trapped in the fire. That is
all."

"I can see the headline now," the reporter said.  '"baudelaire
murderers torch paperwork.' Wait until the readers of The Daily
Punctilio see this!"

"Somebody tell Mattathias we've captured the children," a nurse cried
in triumph. "You three brats are in big trouble. You're murderers,
arsonists, and spurious doctors."

"That's not true," Klaus said, but as he looked around he feared that
no one would believe him. He looked at the spurious key ring in Hal's
hands, that he and his siblings had used to sneak into the Library of
Records. He looked at his medical coat, which he had used to disguise
himself as a doctor. And he looked at the rusty blade in his own
hands, which he had just been holding over his sister.  Klaus
remembered when he and his sisters were living with Uncle Monty, and
brought several objects to Mr. Poe as evidence of Olaf's treacherous
plot. Because of these small objects, Olaf was placed under arrest,
and now Klaus was afraid that the same thing would happen to the
Baudelaires.

"Surround them!" the hook-handed man called, pointing at the children
with one curved glove. "But be careful. The bookworm still has the
knife!" Olaf's associates spread out in a circle and slowly began
walking toward the youngsters at all angles. Sunny whimpered in
fright, and Klaus picked her up and put her on the gurney.

"Arrest the Baudelaires!" a doctor cried.

"That's what we're doing, you fool!" Esme' replied impatiently, but
when she turned her head to the Baudelaires they saw her wink above
her surgical mask.

"We're going to capture only one of you," she said, in a quiet voice
so the audience wouldn't hear her. With two long fingernailed hands
she reached down to her stiletto heels. "This in footwear isn't just
useful for making me look glamorous and feminine," she said, removing
the shoes and pointing them at the children. "These stilettos are
perfect for slitting children's throats. Two bratty little Baudelaires
will be killed while trying to escape from justice, leaving one bratty
little Baudelaire to give us the fortune."

"You'll never get your hands on our fortune," Klaus said, "or your
shoes on our throats."

"We'll see," Esme' said, and swung her left shoe at Klaus as if it
were a sword. Klaus ducked quickly and felt the whoosh!of air as the
blade swept over him.

"She's trying to kill us!" Klaus shouted to the audience. "Can't you
see? These are the real murderers!"

"No one will ever believe you," Esme' said in a sinister whisper, and
swung her right shoe at Sunny, who moved away just in time.

"I don't believe you!" shouted Hal. "My eyesight might not be what it
used to be, but I can see your phony medical coat."

"I don't believe you, either!" a nurse cried. "I can see that rusty
knife!"

Esme' swung both shoes at the same time, but they collided in midair
instead of hitting the children. "Why don't you surrender?" she
hissed. "We've finally trapped you, just as you trapped Olaf all those
other times."

"Now you know what it feels like to be a villain," the bald man
chuckled. "Move closer, everyone! Mattathias told me that whoever
grabs them first gets to choose where to go for dinner tonight!"

"Is that so?" the hook-handed man asked. "Well, I'm in the mood for
pizza." He swung a rubber-gloved hook at Klaus, who fell back against
the gurney, rolling it out of the evil man's reach.

"I feel more like Chinese food," one of the powder- faced women said.
"Let's go to that place where we celebrated the Quagmire kidnapping."

"I want to go to Cafe Salmonella," Esme' snarled, disentangling her
shoes.

Klaus pushed against the gurney again, wheeling it in the other
direction as the circle of associates closed in. He held the rusty
knife up for protection, but the middle Baudelaire did not think he
could use a weapon, even on people as wicked as these. If Count Olaf
had been trapped, he would not have hesitated to swing the rusty blade
at the people who were surrounding him, but despite what the bald man
had said, Klaus did not feel like a villain. He felt like someone who
needed to escape, and as he pushed against the gurney again, he knew
how he was going to do it.

"Get back!" Klaus cried. "This knife is very sharp!"

"You can't kill all of us," the hook-handed man replied. "In fact, I
doubt you have the courage to kill anyone."

"It doesn't take courage to kill someone," Klaus said.  "It takes a
severe lack of moral stamina."

At the mention of the phrase "severe lack of moral stamina," which
here means "cruel selfishness combined with a love of violence,"
Olaf's associates laughed in delight.

"Your fancy words won't save you now, you twerp," Esme' said.

"That's true," Klaus admitted. "What will save me now is a bed on
wheels used to transport hospital patients."

Without another word, Klaus tossed the rusty knife to the floor,
startling Olaf's associates into stepping back. The circle of people
with a severe lack of moral stamina was spread out a little more, just
for a moment, but a moment was all the Baudelaires needed.  Klaus
jumped onto the gurney, which began to roll quickly toward the square
metal door they had come in. A cry rose from the audience as the
Baudelaires sped past Olaf's associates.

"Get them!" the hook-handed man cried. "They're getting away!"

"They won't get away from me!" Hal promised, and grabbed the gurney
just before it reached the door. The gurney slowed to a halt, and for
a second Sunny found herself face-to-face with the old man.
Butterflies fluttered in the youngest Baudelaire's stomach as he
glared at her from behind his tiny glasses. Unlike Olaf's associates,
Hal was not an evil person, of course. He was merely someone who loved
the Library of Records and was trying to capture the people he
believed had set it on fire, and it pained Sunny to see that he
thought she was an evil criminal, instead of an unlucky infant. But
she knew she did not have time to explain to Hal what had really
happened. She scarcely had time to say a single word, and yet that is
precisely what the youngest Baudelaire did.

"Sorry," Sunny said to Hal, and gave him a small smile. Then she
opened her mouth a little wider, and bit Hal's hand as gently as she
could, so that he would let go of the gurney without getting hurt.

"Ow!" Hal said, and let go. "The baby bit me!" he shouted to the
crowd.

"Are you hurt?" a nurse asked.

"No," Hal replied, "but I let go of the gurney.  They're rolling out
the door!"

The Baudelaires rolled out the door, with Violet's eyes flickering
open, Klaus steering the gurney, and Sunny hanging on for dear life.
The children rolled down the hallways of the Surgical Ward, dodging
around surprised doctors and other medical professionals.

"Attention!" announced Mattathias's voice over the intercom. "This is
Mattathias, the Head of Human Resources! The Baudelaire murderers and
arsonists are escaping on a gurney! Capture them at once! Also, the
fire is spreading throughout the hospital! You might want to
evacuate!"

"Noriz!" Sunny shouted.

"I'm going as fast as I can!" Klaus cried, dangling his legs over the
side of the gurney to scoot it along. "Violet, wake up, please! You
can help push!"

"I'm try... ing...." Violet muttered, squinting around her. The
anesthesia made everything seem faint and foggy, and it was almost
impossible for her to speak, let alone move.

"Door!" Sunny shrieked, pointing to the door that led out of the
Surgical Ward. Klaus steered the gurney in that direction and rode
past Olaf's fat associate who looked like neither a man nor a woman,
who was still dressed as a spurious guard. With a terrible roar, it
began to give chase, walking in huge, lumbering steps, as the
Baudelaires raced toward a small group of Volunteers Fighting Disease.
The bearded volunteer, who was playing some very familiar chords on
his guitar, looked up to see the gurney wheel past them.

"Those must be those murderers Mattathias was talking about!" he said.
"Come on, everyone, let's help that guard capture them!"

"Sounds good to me," another volunteer agreed. "I'm a bit tired of
singing that song, if you want to know the truth."

Klaus steered the gurney around a corner, as the volunteers joined the
overweight associate in pursuit. "Wake up," he begged Violet, who was
looking around her in a confused way. "Please, Violet!"

"Stairs!" Sunny said, pointing to a staircase. Klaus turned the gurney
in the direction his sister indicated, and the children began to roll
down the stairs, bouncing up and down with each step. It was a fast,
slippery ride that reminded the children of sliding down the
bannisters at 667 Dark Avenue, or colliding with Mr.  Poe's automobile
when they were living with Uncle Monty. At a curve in the staircase,
Klaus scraped his shoes against the floor to stop the gurney, and then
leaned over to look at one of the hospital's confusing maps.

"I'm trying to figure out if we should go through that door," he said,
pointing at a door marked "Ward for People with Nasty Rashes," "or
continue down the staircase."

"Dleen!" Sunny cried, which meant "We can't continue down the
staircase-look!"

Klaus looked, and even Violet managed to focus enough to look down
where Sunny was pointing. Down the staircase, just past the next
landing, was a flickering, orange glow, as if the sun was rising out
of the hospital basement, and a few wisps of dark black smoke were
curling up the staircase like the tentacles of some ghostly animal. It
was an eerie sight that had haunted the Baudelaires in their dreams,
ever since that fateful day at the beach when all their trouble began.
For a moment, the three children were unable to do anything but stare
down at the orange glow and the tentacles of smoke, and think about
all they had lost because of what they were looking at.

"Fire," Violet said faintly.

"Yes," Klaus said. "It's spreading up this staircase.  We've got to
turn and go back upstairs."

From upstairs, the Baudelaires listened to the associate roar again,
and heard the bearded volunteer reply.

"We'll help you capture them," he said. "Lead the way, sir-or is it
madam? I can't tell."

"No up," Sunny said.

"I know," Klaus said. "We can't go up the stairs and we can't go down.
We have to go into the Ward for People with Nasty Rashes."

Having made this rash decision, Klaus turned the gurney and wheeled it
through the door, just as Mattathias's voice came through on the
intercom. "This is Mattathias, the Head of Human Resources," he said
hurriedly. "All associates of Dr. Flacutono, continue to search for
the children! Everyone else, gather in front of the hospital-either we
will catch the murderers as they escape, or they'll be burned to a
crisp!"

The children rolled into the Ward for People with Nasty Rashes and saw
that Mattathias was right. The gurney was racing down a hallway, and
the children could see another orange glow at the far end of it. The
children heard another roar behind them as the overweight associate
lumbered down the stairs. The siblings were trapped in the middle of a
hallway that led only to a fiery death or to Olaf's clutches.

Klaus leaned down and stopped the gurney. "We'd better hide," he said,
jumping to the floor. "It's too dangerous to be rolling around like
this."

"Where?" Sunny asked, as Klaus helped her down.

"Someplace close by," Klaus said, grabbing Violet's arm. "The
anesthesia is still wearing off, so Violet can't walk too far."

"I'll... try...." Violet murmured, stepping unsteadily off the gurney
and leaning on Klaus. The children looked around and saw that the
nearest door was marked "Supply Closet."

"Glaynop?" Sunny asked.

"I guess so," Klaus said doubtfully, opening the door with one hand
while balancing Violet with the other. "I don't know what we can do in
a supply closet, but at least it'll hide us for a few moments."

Klaus and Sunny helped their sister through the door and locked it
behind them. Except for a small window in the corner, the closet
looked identical to the one where Klaus and Sunny had hidden to
decipher the anagram in the patient list. It was a small room, with
only one flickering lightbulb hanging from the ceiling, and there were
a row of white medical coats hanging from hooks, a rusty sink, huge
cans of alphabet soup, and small boxes of rubber bands, but as the two
younger Baudelaires looked at these supplies, they did not look like
devices for translating anagrams and impersonating medical
professionals. Klaus and Sunny looked at all these objects, and then
at their older sister. To their relief, Violet's face was a bit less
pale, and her eyes were a bit less confused, which was a very good
sign. The eldest Baudelaire needed to be as awake as she could be,
because the items in the closet were looking less and less like
supplies, and more and more like materials for an invention.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN

When Violet Baudelaire was five years old, she won her first invention
contest with an automatic rolling pin she'd fashioned out of a broken
window shade and six pairs of roller skates. As the judges placed the
gold medal around her neck, one of them said to her, "I bet you could
invent something with both hands tied behind your back," and Violet
smiled proudly. She knew, of course, that the judge did not mean that
he was going to tie her up, but merely that she was so skilled at
inventing that she could probably build something even with
substantial interference, a phrase which here means "something getting
in her way."

The eldest Baudelaire had proved the judge right dozens of times, of
course, inventing everything from a lockpick to a welding torch with
the substantial interference of being in a hurry and not having the
right tools. But Violet thought she had never had as much substantial
interference as the lingering effects of anesthesia as she squinted at
the objects in the supply closet and tried to focus on what her
siblings were saying.

"Violet," Klaus said, "I know that the anesthesia hasn't completely
worn off, but we need you to try to invent something."

"Yes," Violet said faintly, rubbing her eyes with her hands. "I...
know."

"We'll help you all we can," Klaus said. "Just tell us what to do. The
fire is consuming this entire hospital, and we have to get out of here
quickly."

"Rallam," Sunny added, which meant "And Olaf's associates are chasing
us."

"Open... the window," Violet said with difficulty, pointing to the
window in the corner.

Klaus helped Violet lean against the wall, so he could step over to
the window without letting her fall. He opened the window and looked
outside. "It looks like we're on the third floor," he said, "or maybe
the fourth. There's smoke in the air, so it's hard to tell.  We're not
so high up, but it's still too far to jump."

"Climb?" Sunny asked.

"There's an intercom speaker right below us," Klaus said.  "I suppose
we could hang on to that and climb down to the bushes below, but we'd
be climbing in front of a huge crowd. The doctors and nurses are
helping the patients escape, and there's Hal, and that reporter from
The Daily Punctilio and-"

The middle Baudelaire was interrupted by a faint sound coming from
outside the hospital.  "We are Volunteers Fighting Disease, And we're
cheerful all day long.  If someone said that we were sad, That person
would be wrong."

"And the Volunteers Fighting Disease," Klaus continued. "They're
waiting at the entrance to the hospital, just like Mattathias told
them to. Can you invent something to fly over them?"

Violet frowned and closed her eyes, standing still for a moment as the
volunteers continued singing.  "We visit people who are sick, And try
to make them smile, Even if their noses bleed, Or if they cough up
bile."

"Violet?" Klaus asked. "You're not falling asleep again, are you?"

"No," Violet said. "I'm... thinking. We need... to distract... the
crowd... before we... climb down."

The children heard a faint roar from beyond the closet door. "Kesalf,"
Sunny said, which meant "That's Olaf's associate. It sounds like it's
entering the Ward for People with Nasty Rashes. We'd better hurry."

"Klaus," Violet said, and opened her eyes. "Open those boxes... of
rubber bands. Start to string... them together... to make... a cord."
"Tra la la, Fiddle dee dee, Hope you get well soon.  Ho ho ho, hee hee
hee, Have a heart-shaped balloon."

Klaus looked down and watched the volunteers giving balloons out to
the hospital patients who had been evacuated from the hospital. "But
how will we distract the crowd?" he asked.

"I... don't know," Violet admitted, and looked down at the floor. "I'm
having... trouble focusing my... inventing skills."

"Help," Sunny said.

"Don't cry for help, Sunny," Klaus said. "No one will hear us."

"Help," Sunny insisted, and took off her white medical coat. Opening
her mouth wide, she bit down on the fabric, ripping a small strip off
the coat with her teeth. Then she held up the strip of white cloth,
and handed it to Violet.

"Ribbon," she said, and Violet gave her a weary smile.  With unsteady
fingers, the eldest Baudelaire tied her hair up to keep it out of her
eyes, using the thin strip of fabric instead of a hair ribbon. She
closed her eyes again, and then nodded.

"I know... it's a bit silly," Violet said. "I think ... it did help,
Sunny. Klaus... get to work... on the rubber bands. Sunny-can you
open... one of those cans of soup?"

"Treen," Sunny said, which meant "Yes-I opened one earlier, to help
decode the anagrams."

"Good," Violet replied. With her hair up in a ribbon- even if the
ribbon was spurious-her voice sounded stronger and more confident. "We
need... an empty can... as quickly as... possible." "We visit people
who are ill, And try to make them laugh, Even when the doctor says He
must saw them in half.

We sing and sing all night and day, And then we sing some more.  We
sing to boys with broken bones And girls whose throats are sore."

As the members of V.F.D. continued their cheerful song, the
Baudelaires worked quickly. Klaus opened a box of rubber bands and
began stringing them together, Sunny began to gnaw at the top of a can
of soup, and Violet went to the sink and splashed water on her face to
try to make herself as alert as possible. Finally, by the time the
volunteers were singing "Trala la, Fiddle dee dee, Hope you get well
soon.  Ho ho ho, hee hee hee, Have a heart-shaped balloon."

Klaus had a long cord of rubber bands curled at his feet like a snake,
Sunny had taken the top off a can of soup and was pouring it down the
sink, and Violet was staring anxiously at the bottom of the closet
door, from which a very thin wisp of smoke was crawling out.

"The fire is in the hallway," Violet said, as the children heard
another roar from the hallway, "and so is Olaf's henchperson. We have
only a few moments."

"The cord is all ready," Klaus said, "but how can we distract the
crowd with an empty soup can?"

"It's not an empty soup can," Violet said, "not anymore. Now it's a
spurious intercom. Sunny, poke one hole in the bottom of the can."

"Pietrisycamollaviadelrechiotemexity," Sunny said, but she did as
Violet asked and poked her sharpest tooth through the bottom of the
can.

"Now," Violet said, "you two hold this near the window. Don't let the
crowd see it. They have to think my voice is coming out of the
intercom."

Klaus and Sunny held the empty soup can near the window, and Violet
leaned in and stuck her head inside it, as if it were a mask. The
eldest Baudelaire took a deep breath to gather her courage, and then
she began to speak. From inside the can her voice sounded scratchy and
faint, as if she were talking with a piece of aluminum foil over her
mouth, which was precisely how she wanted to sound.

"Attention!" Violet announced, before the volunteers could sing the
verse about singing to men with measles. "This is Babs.  Mattathias
has resigned due to personal problems, so I am once again the Head of
Human Resources. The Baudelaire murderers and arsonists have been
spotted in the unfinished wing of the hospital. We require everyone's
assistance in making sure they do not escape. Please rush over there
right away. That is all."

Violet pulled her head out of the can, and looked at her siblings. "Do
you think it worked?" she asked.

Sunny opened her mouth to answer, but she was interrupted by the voice
of the bearded volunteer.

"Did you hear that?" the children heard him say. "The criminals are
over in the unfinished half of the hospital. Come on, everyone."

"Maybe some of us should stay here at the front entrance, just in
case," said a voice the Baudelaires recognized as Hal's.

Violet stuck her head back into the can. "Attention!" she announced.
"This is Babs, the Head of Human Resources. No one should stay at the
front entrance to the hospital. It's too dangerous.  Proceed at once
to the unfinished wing. That is all."

"I can see the headline now," said the reporter from The Daily
Punctilio."'MURDERERS CAPTURED IN UNFINISHED HALF OF HOSPITAL BY
WELL-ORGANIZED MEDICAL PROFESSIONALS.' Wait until the readers of The
Daily Punctilio see that!"

There was a cheer from the crowd, which faded as they walked away from
the front of Heimlich Hospital.

"It worked," Violet said. "We fooled them. We're as good at tricking
people as Olaf is."

"And at disguises," Klaus said.

"Anagrams," Sunny said.

"And lying to people," Violet said, thinking of Hal, and the
shopkeeper at Last Chance General Store and all the Volunteers
Fighting Disease. "Maybe we're becoming villains after all."

"Don't say that," Klaus said. "We're not villains.  We're good people.
We had to do tricky things in order to save our lives."

"Olaf has to do tricky things," Violet said, "to save his life."

"Different," Sunny said.

"Maybe it's not different," Violet said sadly. "Maybe- "

Violet was interrupted by an angry roar coming from just outside the
closet door. Olaf's overweight assistant had reached the supply closet
and was now fumbling at the door with its enormous hands.

"We can discuss this later," Klaus said. "We have to get out of here
right now."

"We're not going to climb," Violet said, "not with such a skinny,
rubbery cord. We're going to bounce."

"Bounce?" Sunny asked doubtfully.

"Plenty of people bounce from high places on long, rubbery cords just
for fun," Violet said, "so I'm sure we can do it to escape. I'll tie
the cord to the faucet with the Devil's Tongue knot, and we'll each
take turns jumping out the window. The cord should catch us before we
hit the ground, and bounce us up, and down, and up, and down, more and
more gently each time. Eventually we'll get to the bottom safely, and
then we'll toss it back up to the next person."

"It sounds risky," Klaus said. "I'm not sure the cord is long enough."


"It is risky," Violet agreed, "but not as risky as a fire."

The associate rattled the door furiously, making a large crack right
near the lock. Black smoke began to pour through the crack as if the
assistant were pouring ink into the closet, as Violet hurriedly tied
the cord to the faucet and then tugged on it to make sure it was
secure.

"I'll go first," she said. "I invented it, so I'd better test it."

"No," Klaus said. "We're not taking turns."

"Together," Sunny agreed.

"If we all go down together," Violet said, "I'm not sure the cord will
hold."

"We're not leaving anyone behind," Klaus said firmly.  "Not this time.
Either we all escape, or none of us do."

"But if none of us do," Violet said tearfully, "then there won't be
any Baudelaires left. Olaf will have won."

Klaus reached into his pocket and brought out a sheet of paper. He
unfolded it, and his sisters could see that it was page thirteen of
the Snicket file. He pointed to the photograph of the Baudelaire
parents and the sentence that was printed below it.

"'Because of the evidence discussed on page nine,'" he read out loud,
"'experts now suspect that there may in fact be one survivor of the
fire, but the survivor's whereabouts are unknown.' We've got to
survive, too-so we can find out what happened, and bring Olaf to
justice."

"But if we take turns," Violet said frantically, "there's a better
chance that one of us will survive."

"We're not leaving anyone behind," Klaus said firmly.  "That's what
makes us different from Olaf."

Violet thought for a moment, and nodded. "You're right," she said.

Olaf's associate kicked at the door, and the crack grew bigger. The
children could see a tiny orange light shining in the hallway and
realized that the fire and the associate must have reached the door at
the same time.

"I'm scared," Violet said.

"I'm frightened," Klaus said.

"Sheer terror," Sunny said, and the associate kicked the door again,
forcing a few sparks through the crack in the door.  The Baudelaires
looked at one another, and each child grabbed the rubber band cord
with one hand. With their other hands they clasped one another, and
then, without another word, they leaped out of the window of Heimlich
Hospital.

STOP

There are many things in this world I do not know. I do not know how
butterflies get out of their cocoons without damaging their wings. I
do not know why anyone would boil vegetables when roasting them is
tastier. I do not know how to make olive oil, and I do not know why
dogs bark before an earthquake, and I do not know why some people
voluntarily choose to climb mountains where it is freezing and
difficult to breathe, or live in the suburbs, where the coffee is
watery and all of the houses look alike. I do not know where the
Baudelaire children are now, or if they are safe or if they are even
alive. But there are some things I do know, and one of them is that
the window of the supply closet in the Ward for People with Nasty
Rashes of Heimlich Hospital was not on the third floor or the fourth
floor, as Klaus had guessed. The window was on the second floor, so
that when the three children dropped through the smoky air, clinging
to the rubber band cord for dear life, Violet's invention worked
perfectly. Like a yo-yo, the children bounced gently up and down,
brushing their feet against one of the bushes planted in front of the
hospital, and after a few bounces it was safe to drop to the ground
and hug each other with relief.

"We made it," Violet said. "It was a close call, but we survived."

The Baudelaires looked behind them at the hospital, and saw just how
close a call it had been. The building looked like a fiery ghost, with
great bursts of flame coming from the windows, and oceans of smoke
pouring from great gaping holes in the walls. The children could hear
glass shattering as the windows burned away, and the crackle of wood
as the floors fell through. It occurred to the children that their own
house must have looked like this on the day it burned down, and they
stepped back from the burning building and huddled together as the air
grew thick with ashes and smoke, obscuring the hospital from view.

"Where can we go?" Klaus asked, shouting over the roar of the fire.
"Any minute now, the crowd will figure out that we're not in the
unfinished half of the hospital, and return here."

"Run!" Sunny shrieked.

"But we can't even see where we're going!" Violet cried. "The whole
area is filling up with smoke!"

"Stay down!" Klaus said, dropping to the ground and beginning to
crawl. "In The Encyclopedia of Escaping Arson, the author wrote that
there's more oxygen closer to the ground, so we can breathe more
easily. But we need to get to some kind of shelter right away."

"Where will we find some kind of shelter, in this empty landscape?"
Violet asked, crawling behind her brother. "The hospital is the only
building for miles, and it's burning to the ground!"

"I don't know," Klaus said, coughing loudly, "but we can't breathe in
this smoke for long!"

"Hurry up!" the Baudelaires heard a voice call out of the smoke. "This
way!" A long, black shape emerged from the smoky air, and the children
saw it was an automobile, pulling up in front of the hospital. An
automobile, of course, is a kind of shelter, but the siblings froze on
the ground and dared not crawl an inch farther toward the car.

"Hurry up!" Olaf's voice said again. "Hurry up or I'll leave you
behind!"

"I'm coming, darling." From behind them, the Baudelaires heard the
reply of Esme' Squalor. "Lucafont and Flacutono are with me, and the
ladies are following behind. I had them take all the medical coats we
could find, in case we need them for costumes again."

"Good thinking," Olaf replied. "Can you see the car in the smoke?"

"Yes," Esme' said, her voice growing closer. The Baudelaires could
hear the odd footsteps of her stiletto-heeled shoes as she strode
toward the automobile. "Open the trunk, darling, and we'll put the
costumes in."

"Oh, all right," Olaf sighed, and the children saw the tall figure of
their enemy step out of the car.

"Wait up, Olaf!" the bald man cried.

"You fool," Olaf replied. "I told you to call me Mattathias until we
leave the hospital grounds. Hurry up and get in the car. The Snicket
file wasn't in the Library of Records, but I think I know where I can
find it. Once we destroy those thirteen pages, there'll be no stopping
us."

"We've got to destroy the Baudelaires, too," Esme' said.

"We would have destroyed them, if all of you hadn't messed up my
plan," he said, "but never mind that. We have to get out of here
before the authorities come."

"But your largest assistant is still in the Rash Ward, looking for the
brats!" the bald man said, and the children heard him open the door of
the automobile.

The hook-handed man spoke up, and the children could see his odd shape
in the smoke as he got into the car after the bald assistant. "The
Ward for People with Nasty Rashes is entirely destroyed," he said. "I
hope the big one got out O.K."

"We're not going to wait around to find out if that fool lived or
died," Olaf snarled. "As soon as the ladies can put the costumes in
the trunk, we'll get out of here. It's been splendid setting this
fire, but we've got to find the Snicket file as soon as possible,
before You-Know-Who does."

"V.F.D.!" Esme' said with a cackle. "The real V.F.D., that is, not
those ridiculous singers!"

The trunk opened with a creak, and the children saw the shadow of the
trunk's lid flip open into the smoky air. The lid was peppered with
tiny holes-bullet holes, it looked like, undoubtedly from being
pursued by the police. Olaf strode back to the car and continued
giving orders.

"Get out of the front seat, you idiots," Olaf said.  "My girlfriend
sits in front, and the rest of you can pile in the back."

"Yes, boss," the bald man replied.

"We have the costumes, Mattathias." The voice of one of the
powder-faced women was faint in the smoke. "Just give us a few seconds
to reach the car."

Violet leaned as close as she could to her siblings so she could
whisper to them without being heard. "We've got to go in there," she
said.

"Where?" Klaus whispered in reply.

"In the trunk," Violet replied. "It's our only chance to get out of
here without getting captured-or worse."

"Culech!" Sunny said in a horrified whisper, which meant something
along the lines of "Getting in the trunk is the same thing as getting
captured!"

"We've got to get the rest of the Snicket file before Olaf does,"
Violet said, "or we'll never be able to clear our names."

"Or bring Olaf to justice," Klaus said.

"Ezan," Sunny said, which meant "Or find out if one of our parents
really survived the fire."

"The only way we can do all those things," Violet said, "is to get in
the trunk of that car."

Olaf's voice floated through the smoke, as deceitful and dangerous as
the fire itself. "Get in the car this instant!" he ordered his
associates. "I'm going to leave at the count of three."

The Baudelaires gripped each other's hands so firmly that it hurt to
hang on. "Think of everything we have survived together," Violet
whispered. "We've lived through countless unfortunate events, only to
find ourselves alone. If one of our parents has survived, it'll all be
worthwhile. We have to find them if it's the last thing we do."

"One!"

Klaus looked at the gaping trunk, which looked like the mouth of some
dark and smoky beast, eager to devour him and his siblings. "You're
right," he murmured finally. "We can't stay in this smoky air much
longer, or we'll become asphyxiated. The shelter of the trunk is our
only hope."

"Yes!" Sunny whispered.

"Two!"

The Baudelaire children stood up and scurried into the trunk of Count
Olaf's car. The trunk was damp and smelled terrible, but the children
crawled deep into its depths so they wouldn't be seen.

"Wait!" the powder-faced woman called, and the Baudelaires felt the
slap of the medical coats being tossed on top of them. "I don't want
to be left behind! I can't breathe out here!"

"Will we be able to breathe in here?" Violet asked Klaus as quietly as
she could.

"Yes," Klaus said. "Air will come through the bullet holes. This is
not the sort of shelter I had in mind, but I guess it might do."

"Golos," Sunny said, which meant "It'll have to do, until something
better comes along," and her siblings nodded.

"Three!"

The trunk slammed closed, leaving them in utter darkness, and their
shelter rattled and shook as Olaf started the engine and began to
drive across the landscape, which was as flat and desolate as ever.
But the children could not see outside, of course.  In the blackness
of the trunk, they could not see anything at all.  They could only
hear their long, shivering breaths as the air rushed through the
bullet holes, and feel their shoulders tremble as they shivered in
fear. It was not the sort of shelter the children had in mind, never
in their entire lives, but as they huddled together they guessed it
might do. For the Baudelaire orphans-if indeed they were still
orphans-the shelter of Count Olaf's trunk would have to do, until
something better came along.

About the Author LEMONY SNICKET is widely regarded as one of the most
difficult children's authors to capture and imprison. Recently, he had
to give up on his hobbies due to laws regarding musical performances
in mountainous terrain. Most things written about him are not true,
but this is.

BRETT HELQUIST was born in Ganado, Arizona, grew up in Orem, Utah, and
now lives in New York City, where among other noble pursuits, he
translates Mr. Snicket's obscure findings into the images that help
readers understand the horror of the Baudelaires' plight.


To my kind editor

I hope that this letter is not mangled by the ferocious and deadly...
in which I am hiding now.... thirteen hundred nineteen and one-half
miles (DOOBY kilometers) from the restaraunt where you celebrated your
most recent birthday... may then exchange (at a near laundromat or
jewelry store for... with... a long mustache. She will give you the
complete manuscript of THE CARNIVOROUS CARNIVAL, along with a satchel
contain...--under which no circumstances should you repair--... he
last... survivor of the Baudel... a sketch... of Chabo, the Wolf Baby,
and Madame Lulu...  or at least, what is left o.

.. Remember, you are my last hope that the tales of the Baudelaire
orphans can finally be told to the general public.  With all due
respect, Lemony Snicket
