A Series of Unfortunate Events
Book the Tenth
The Slippery Slope
Lemony Snicket


CHAPTER ONE

A man of my acquaintance once wrote a poem called "The Road Less
Traveled," describing a journey he took through the woods along a path
most travelers never used. The poet found that the road less traveled
was peaceful but quite lonely, and he was probably a bit nervous as he
went along, because if anything happened on the road less traveled,
the other travelers would be on the road more frequently traveled and
so couldn't hear him as he cried for help. Sure enough, that poet is
now dead.

Like a dead poet, this book can be said to be on the road less
traveled, because it begins with the three Baudelaire children on a
path leading through the Mortmain Mountains, which is not a popular
destination for travelers, and it ends in the churning waters of the
Stricken Stream, which few travelers even go near. But this book is
also on the road less traveled, because unlike books most people
prefer, which provide comforting and entertaining tales about charming
people and talking animals, the tale you are reading now is nothing
but distressing and unnerving, and the people unfortunate enough to be
in the story are far more desperate and frantic than charming, and I
would prefer to not speak about the animals at all. For that reason, I
can no more suggest the reading of this woeful book than I can
recommend wandering around the woods by yourself, because like the
road less traveled, this book is likely to make you feel lonely,
miserable, and in need of help. The Baudelaire orphans, however, had
no choice but to be on the road less traveled. Violet and Klaus, the
two elder Baudelaires, were in a caravan, traveling very quickly along
the high mountain path. Neither Violet, who was fourteen, nor Klaus,
who had recently turned thirteen, had ever thought they would find
themselves on this road, except perhaps with their parents on a family
vacation. But the Baudelaire parents were nowhere to be found after a
terrible fire destroyed their home--although the children had reason
to believe that one parent may not have died in the blaze after
all--and the caravan was not heading up the Mortmain Mountains, toward
a secret headquarters the siblings had heard about and were hoping to
find. The caravan was heading down the Mortmain Mountains, very
quickly, with no way to control or stop its journey, so Violet and
Klaus felt more like fish in a stormy sea than travelers on a
vacation.

But Sunny Baudelaire was in a situation that could be said to be even
more desperate. Sunny was the youngest Baudelaire, still learning to
speak in a way that everyone could understand, so she scarcely had
words for how frightened she was. Sunny was traveling uphill, toward
the headquarters in the Mortmain Mountains, in an automobile that was
working perfectly, but the driver of the automobile was a man who was
reason enough for being terrified. Some people called this man wicked.
Some called him facinorous, which is a fancy word for "wicked." But
everyone called him Count Olaf, unless he was wearing one of his
ridiculous disguises and making people call him a false name. Count
Olaf was an actor, but he had largely abandoned his theatrical career
to try to steal the enormous fortune the Baudelaire parents had left
behind. Olaf's schemes to get the fortune had been mean-spirited and
particularly complicated, but nevertheless he had managed to attract a
girlfriend, a villainous and stylish woman named Esme' Squalor, who
was sitting next to Count Olaf in the car, cackling nastily and
clutching Sunny on her lap. Also in the car were several employees of
Olaf's, including a man with hooks instead of hands, two women who
liked to wear white powder all over their faces, and three new
comrades Olaf had recently recruited at Caligari Carnival. The
Baudelaire children had been at the carnival, too, wearing disguises
of their own, and had pretended to join Count Olaf in his treachery,
but the villain had seen through their ruse, a phrase which here means
"realized who they really were, and cut the knot attaching the caravan
to the car, leaving Sunny in Olaf's clutches and her siblings tumbling
toward their doom." Sunny sat in the car and felt Esme''s long
fingernails scratch her shoulders, and worried about what would happen
to her and what was happening to her older siblings, as she heard
their screams getting fainter and fainter as the car drove farther and
farther away.

"We have to stop this caravan!" Klaus screamed. Hurriedly, he put on
his glasses, as if by improving his vision he might improve the
situation. But even in perfect focus, he could see their predicament
was dire. The caravan had served as a home for several performers at
the carnival's House of Freaks before they defected--a word which here
means "joined Count Olaf's band of revolting comrades"--and now the
contents of this tiny home were rattling and crashing with each bump
in the road. Klaus ducked to avoid a roasting pan, which Hugo the
hunchback had used to prepare meals and which had toppled off a shelf
in the commotion. He lifted his feet from the floor as a set of
dominoes skittered by--a set that Colette the contortionist had liked
to play with. And he squinted above him as a hammock swung violently
overhead. An ambidextrous person named Kevin used to sleep in that
hammock until he had joined Olaf's troupe, along with Hugo and
Colette, and now it seemed like it might fall at any moment and trap
the Baudelaires beneath it.

The only comforting thing that Klaus could see was his sister, who was
looking around the caravan with a fierce and thoughtful expression and
unbuttoning the shirt the two siblings were sharing as part of their
disguise. "Help me get us out of these freakish pants we're both in,"
Violet said. "There's no use pretending we're a two-headed person
anymore, and we both need to be as able-bodied as possible."

In moments, the two Baudelaires wriggled out of the oversized clothing
they had taken from Count Olaf's disguise kit and were standing in
regular clothes, trying to balance in the shaky caravan. Klaus quickly
stepped out of the path of a falling potted plant, but he couldn't
help smiling as he looked at his sister. Violet was tying her hair up
in a ribbon to keep it out of her eyes, a sure sign that she was
thinking up an invention. Violet's impressive mechanical skills had
saved the Baudelaires' lives more times than they could count, and
Klaus was certain that his sister could concoct something that could
stop the caravan's perilous journey.

"Are you going to make a brake?" Klaus asked.

"Not yet," Violet said. "A brake interferes with the wheels of a
vehicle, and this caravan's wheels are spinning too quickly for
interference. I'm going to unhook these hammocks and use them as a
drag chute."

"Drag chute?" Klaus said.

"Drag chutes are a little like parachutes attached to the back of a
car," Violet explained hurriedly, as a coatrack clattered around her.
She reached up to the hammock where she and Klaus had slept and
quickly detached it from the wall. "Race drivers use them to help stop
their cars when a race is over. If I dangle these hammocks out the
caravan door, we should slow down considerably."

"What can I do?" Klaus said.

"Look in Hugo's pantry," Violet said, "and see if you can find
anything sticky."

When someone tells you to do something unusual without an explanation,
it is very difficult not to ask why, but Klaus had learned long ago to
have faith in his sister's ideas, and quickly crossed to a large
cupboard Hugo had used to store ingredients for the meals he prepared.
The door of the cupboard was swinging back and forth as if a ghost
were fighting with it, but most of the items were still rattling
around inside. Klaus looked at the cupboard and thought of his baby
sister, who was getting farther and farther away from him. Even though
Sunny was still quite young, she had recently shown an interest in
cooking, and Klaus remembered how she had made up her own hot
chocolate recipe, and helped prepare a delicious soup the entire
caravan had enjoyed. Klaus held the cupboard door open and peered
inside, and hoped that his sister would survive to develop her
culinary skills.

"Klaus," Violet said firmly, taking down another hammock and tying it
to the first one. "I don't mean to rush you, but we need to stop this
caravan as soon as possible. Have you found anything sticky?"

Klaus blinked and returned to the task at hand. A ceramic pitcher
rolled around his feet as he pushed through the bottles and jars of
cooking materials. "There's lots of sticky things here," he said. "I
see blackstrap molasses, wild clover honey, corn syrup, aged balsamic
vinegar, apple butter, strawberry jam, caramel sauce, maple syrup,
butterscotch topping, maraschino liqueur, virgin and extra-virgin
olive oil, lemon curd, dried apricots, mango chutney, crema di noci,
tamarind paste, hot mustard, marshmallows, creamed corn, peanut
butter, grape preserves, salt water taffy, condensed milk, pumpkin pie
filling, and glue. I don't know why Hugo kept glue in the pantry, but
never mind. Which items do you want?"

"All of them," Violet said firmly. "Find some way of mixing them,
while I tie these hammocks together."

Klaus grabbed the pitcher from the floor and began to pour the
ingredients into it, while Violet, sitting on the floor to make it
easier to balance, gathered the cords of the hammocks in her lap and
began twisting them into a knot. The caravan's journey grew rougher
and rougher, and with each jolt, the Baudelaires felt a bit seasick,
as if they were back on Lake Lachrymose, crossing its stormy waters to
try and rescue one of their many unfortunate guardians. But despite
the tumult around them, in moments Violet stood up with the hammocks
gathered in her arms, all tied together in a mass of fabric, and Klaus
looked at his sister and held up the pitcher, which was filled to the
brim with a thick and colorful slime.

"When I say the word," Violet said, "I'm going to open the door and
cast these hammocks out. I want you at the other end of the caravan,
Klaus. Open that little window and pour that mixture all over the
wheels. If the hammocks work as a drag chute and the sticky substance
interferes with the wheels, the caravan should slow down enough to
save us. I just need to tie the hammocks to the doorknob."

"Are you using the Devil's Tongue knot?" Klaus asked.

"The Devil's Tongue hasn't brought us the best luck," Violet said,
referring to several previous rope-related escapades. "I'm using the
Sumac, a knot I invented myself. I named it after a singer I admire.
There--it feels secure. Are you ready to pour that mixture onto the
wheels?"

Klaus crossed to the window and opened it. The wild clattering sound
of the caravan's wheels grew louder, and the Baudelaires stared for a
moment at the countryside racing by. The land was jagged and twisty,
and it seemed that the caravan could tumble at any moment into a hole,
or off the edge of one of the mountain's square peaks. "I guess I'm
ready," Klaus said hesitantly. "Violet, before we try your invention,
I want to tell you something."

"If we don't try it now," Violet said grimly, "you won't have the
chance to tell me anything." She gave her knot one more tug and then
turned back to Klaus. "Now!" she said, and threw open the caravan
door.

It is often said that if you have a room with a view, you will feel
peaceful and relaxed, but if the room is a caravan hurtling down a
steep and twisted road, and the view is an eerie mountain range racing
backward away from you, while chilly mountain winds sting your face
and toss dust into your eyes, then you will not feel one bit of peace
or relaxation. Instead you will feel the horror and panic that the
Baudelaires felt when Violet opened the door. For a moment they could
do nothing but stand still, feeling the wild tilting of the caravan,
and looking up at the odd, square peaks of the Mortmain Mountains, and
hearing the grinding of the caravan's wheels as they rolled over rocks
and tree stumps. But then Violet shouted "Now!" once more, and both
siblings snapped into action. Klaus leaned out the window and began to
pour the mixture of blackstrap molasses, wild clover honey, corn
syrup, aged balsamic vinegar, apple butter, strawberry jam, caramel
sauce, maple syrup, butterscotch topping, maraschino liqueur, virgin
and extra-virgin olive oil, lemon curd, dried apricots, mango chutney,
crema di noci, tamarind paste, hot mustard, marshmallows, creamed
corn, peanut butter, grape preserves, salt water taffy, condensed
milk, pumpkin pie filling, and glue onto the closest wheels, while his
sister tossed the hammocks out of the door, and if you have read
anything of the Baudelaire orphans' lives--which I hope you have
not--then you will not be surprised to read that Violet's invention
worked perfectly. The hammocks immediately caught the rushing air and
swelled out behind the caravan like enormous cloth balloons, which
slowed the caravan down quite a bit, the way you would run much slower
if you were dragging something behind you, like a knapsack or a
sheriff. The sticky mixture fell on the spinning wheels, which
immediately began to move with less ferocity, the way you would run
with less ferocity if you suddenly found yourself running in quicksand
or through lasagne. The caravan slowed down, and the wheels spun less
wildly, and within moments the two Baudelaires were traveling at a
much more comfortable pace.

"It's working!" Klaus cried.

"We're not done yet," Violet said, and walked over to a small table
that had overturned in the confusion. When the Baudelaires were living
at Caligari Carnival, the table had come in handy as a place to sit
and make plans, but now in the Mortmain Mountains, it would come in
handy for a different reason. Violet dragged the table over to the
open door. "Now that the wheels are slowing down," she said, "we can
use this as a brake." Klaus dumped the last of the mixture out of the
pitcher, and turned to his sister. "How?" he said, but Violet was
already showing him how. Quickly she lay on the floor, and holding the
table by its legs, dangled it out of the caravan so it dragged on the
ground. Immediately there was a loud scraping sound, and the table
began to shake roughly in Violet's hands. But she held fast, forcing
the table to scrape against the rocky ground and slow the caravan down
even more. The swaying of the caravan became gentler and gentler, and
the fallen items owned by the carnival employees stopped crashing, and
then with one last whine, the wheels stopped altogether, and
everything was still. Violet leaned out of the door and stuck the
table in front of one of the wheels so it couldn't start rolling
again, and then stood up and looked at her brother.

"We did it," Violet said.

"You did it," Klaus said. "The entire plan was your idea." He put down
the pitcher on the floor and wiped his hands on a fallen towel.

"Don't put down that pitcher," Violet said, looking around the
wreckage of the caravan.

"We should gather up as many useful things as possible. We'll need to
get this caravan moving uphill if we want to rescue Sunny."

"And reach the headquarters," Klaus added. "Count Olaf has the map we
found, but I remember that the headquarters are in the Valley of Four
Drafts, near the source of the Stricken Stream. It'll be very cold
there."

"Well, there is plenty of clothing," Violet said, looking around.
"Let's grab everything we can and organize it outside."

Klaus nodded in agreement, and picked up the pitcher again, along with
several items of clothing that had fallen in a heap on top of a small
hand mirror that belonged to Colette. Staggering from carrying so many
things, he walked out of the caravan behind his sister, who was
carrying a large bread knife, three heavy coats, and a ukulele that
Hugo used to play sometimes on lazy afternoons. The floors of the
caravan creaked as the Baudelaires stepped outside, into the misty and
empty landscape, and realized how fortunate they had been.

The caravan had stopped right at the edge of one of the odd, square
peaks of the mountain range. The Mortmain Mountains looked like a
staircase, heading up into the clouds or down into a veil of thick,
gray mist, and if the caravan had kept going in the same direction,
the two Baudelaires would have toppled over the peak and fallen down
through the mist to the next stair, far, far below. But to one side of
the caravan, the children could see the waters of the Stricken Stream,
which were an odd grayish black color, and moved slowly and lazily
downhill like a river of spilled oil. Had the caravan swerved to one
side, the children would have been dumped into the dark and filthy
waters.

"It looks like the brake worked just in time," Violet said quietly.
"No matter where the caravan would have gone, we would have been
finished."

Klaus nodded in agreement and looked around at the wilderness. "It
will be difficult to navigate the caravan out of here," Klaus said.
"You'll have to invent a steering device."

"And some sort of engine," Violet said. "That will take some time."

"We don't have any time," Klaus said. "If we don't hurry, Count Olaf
will be too far away and we'll never find Sunny."

"We'll find her," Violet said firmly, and put down the items she was
carrying. "Let's go back into the caravan, and look for--"

But before Violet could say what to look for, she was interrupted by
an unpleasant crackling noise. The caravan seemed to moan, and then
slowly began to roll toward the edge of the peak. The Baudelaires
looked down and saw that the wheels had smashed the small table, so
there was nothing to stop the caravan from moving again. Slowly and
awkwardly it pitched forward, dragging the hammocks behind it as it
neared the very edge of the peak. Klaus leaned down to grab hold of a
hammock, but Violet stopped him. "It's too heavy," she said. "We can't
stop it."

"We can't let it fall off the peak!" Klaus cried.

"We'd be dragged down, too," Violet said.

Klaus knew his sister was right, but still he wanted to grab the drag
chute Violet had constructed. It is difficult, when faced with a
situation you cannot control, to admit that you can do nothing, and it
was difficult for the Baudelaires to stand and watch the caravan roll
over the edge of the peak. There was one last creak as the back wheels
bumped against a mound of dirt, and then the caravan disappeared in
absolute silence. The Baudelaires stepped forward and peered over the
edge of the peak, but it was so misty that the caravan was only a
ghostly rectangle, getting smaller and smaller as it faded away.

"Why isn't there a crash?" Klaus asked.

"The drag chute is slowing it down," Violet said. "Just wait."

The siblings waited, and after a moment there was a muffled boom! from
below as the caravan met its fate. In the mist, the children could not
see a thing, but they knew that the caravan and everything inside it
were gone forever, and indeed I have never been able to find its
remains, even after months of searching the area with only a lantern
and a rhyming dictionary for company. It seems that even after
countless nights of battling snow gnats and praying the batteries
would not run out, it is my fate that some of my questions will never
be answered.

Fate is like a strange, unpopular restaurant, filled with odd waiters
who bring you things you never asked for and don't always like. When
the Baudelaires were very young, they would have guessed that their
fate was to grow up in happiness and contentment with their parents in
the Baudelaire mansion, but now both the mansion and their parents
were gone. When they were attending Prufrock Preparatory School, they
had thought that their fate was to graduate alongside their friends
the Quagmires, but they hadn't seen the academy or the two triplets in
a very long time. And just moments ago, it had looked like Violet and
Klaus's fate had been to fall off a peak or into a stream, but now
they were alive and well, but far away from their sister and without a
vehicle to help them find her again.

Violet and Klaus moved closer to one another, and felt the icy winds
of the Mortmain Mountains blow down the road less traveled and give
them goosebumps. They looked at the dark and swirling waters of the
Stricken Stream, and they looked down from the edge of the peak into
the mist, and then looked at one another and shivered, not only at the
fates they had avoided, but at all the mysterious fates that lay
ahead.


CHAPTER TWO

Violet took one last look over the misty peak, and then reached down
to put on one of the heavy coats she had taken from the caravan. "Take
one of these coats," she said to her brother. "It's cold out here, and
it's likely to get even colder. The headquarters are supposed to be
very high up in the mountains. By the time we get there, we'll
probably be wearing every stitch of this clothing."

"But how are we going to get there?" Klaus said. "We're nowhere near
the Valley of Four Drafts, and the caravan is destroyed."

"Let's take a moment to see what we have," Violet said. "I might be
able to construct something from the items we managed to take."

"I hope so," Klaus said. "Sunny is getting farther and farther away.
We'll never catch up with her without some sort of vehicle."

Klaus spread out the items from the caravan, and put on one of the
coats while Violet picked through her pile, but instantly the two
Baudelaires saw that a vehicle was not in the realm of possibility, a
phrase which here means "could not be made from a few small objects
and some articles of clothing previously belonging to carnival
employees." Violet tied her hair up in a ribbon again and frowned down
on the few items they had managed to save. In Klaus's pile there was
the pitcher, still sticky from the substance he had used to slow down
the caravan wheels, as well as Colette's hand mirror, a wool poncho,
and a sweatshirt that read CALlGARl CARNIVAL. In Violet's pile was the
large bread knife, the ukulele, and one more coat. Even Klaus, who was
not as mechanically minded as his sister, knew that the materials
gathered on the ground were not enough to make something that could
take the two children through the Mortmain Mountains.

"I suppose I could make a spark by rubbing two rocks together," Violet
said, looking around the misty countryside for additional inventing
materials, "or we could play the ukulele and bang on the pitcher. A
loud noise might attract some help."

"But who would hear it?" Klaus said, gazing at the gloomy mist. "We
didn't see a sign of anyone else when we were in the caravan. The way
through the Mortmain Mountains is like a poem I read once, about the
road less traveled."

"Did the poem have a happy ending?" Violet asked.

"It was neither happy nor unhappy," Klaus said. "It was ambiguous.
Well, let's gather up these materials and take them with us."

"Take them with us?" Violet said. "We don't know where to go, and we
don't know how to get there."

"Sure we do," Klaus said. "The Stricken Stream starts at a source high
in the mountains, and winds its way down through the Valley of Four
Drafts, where the headquarters are. It's probably not the quickest or
easiest way to get there, but if we follow the stream up the
mountains, it'll take us where we want to go."

"But that could take days," Violet said. "We don't have a map, or any
food or water for the journey, or tents or sleeping bags or any other
camping equipment."

"We can use all this clothing as blankets," Klaus said, "and we can
sleep in any shelter we find. There were quite a few caves on the map
that animals use for hibernation."

The two Baudelaires looked at one another and shivered in the chilly
breeze. The idea of hiking for hours in the mountains, only to sleep
wrapped in someone else's clothing in a cave that might contain
hibernating animals, was not a pleasant one, and the siblings wished
they did not have to take the road less traveled, but instead could
travel in a swift, well-heated vehicle and reach their sister in mere
moments. But wishing, like sipping a glass of punch, or pulling aside
a bearskin rug in order to access a hidden trapdoor in the floor, is
merely a quiet way to spend one's time before the candles are
extinguished on one's birthday cake, and the Baudelaires knew that it
would be best to stop wishing and start their journey. Klaus put the
hand mirror and the ukulele in his coat pockets and picked up the
poncho and the pitcher, while Violet put the bread knife in her pocket
and picked up the sweatshirt and the last coat, and then, with one
last look at the tracks the caravan left behind as it toppled over the
peak, the two children began to follow the Stricken Stream.

If you have ever traveled a long distance with a family member, then
you know that there are times when you feel like talking and times
when you feel like being quiet. This was one of the quiet times.
Violet and Klaus walked up the slopes of the mountain toward the
headquarters they hoped to reach, and they heard the sound of the
mountain winds, a low, tuneless moan like someone blowing across the
top of an empty bottle, and the odd, rough sound of the stream's fish
as they stuck their heads out of the dark, thick waters of the stream,
but both travelers were in a quiet mood and did not say a word to one
another, each lost in their own thoughts.

Violet let her mind wander to the time she had spent with her siblings
in the Village of Fowl Devotees, when a mysterious man named Jacques
Snicket was murdered, and the children were blamed for the crime. They
had managed to escape from prison and rescue their friends Duncan and
Isadora Quagmire from Count Olaf's clutches, but then had been
separated at the last moment from the two triplets, who sailed away in
a self sustaining hot air mobile home built by a man named Hector.
None of the Baudelaires had seen Hector or the two Quagmires since,
and Violet wondered if they were safe and if they had managed to
contact a secret organization they'd discovered. The organization was
called V.F.D., and the Baudelaires had not yet learned exactly what
the organization did, or even what all the letters stood for. The
children thought that the headquarters at the Valley of Four Drafts
might prove to be helpful, but now, as the eldest Baudelaire trudged
alongside the Stricken Stream, she wondered if she would ever find the
answers she was looking for.

Klaus was also thinking about the Quagmires, although he was thinking
about when the Baudelaires first met them, at Prufrock Preparatory
School. Many of the students at the school had been quite mean to the
three siblings--particularly a very nasty girl named Carmelita
Spats--but Isadora and Duncan had been very kind, and soon the
Baudelaires and the Quagmires had become inseparable, a word which
here means "close friends." One reason for their friendship had been
that both sets of children had lost people who were close to them. The
Baudelaires had lost their parents, of course, and the Quagmires had
lost not only their parents but their brother, the third Quagmire
triplet, whose name was Quigley. Klaus thought about the Quagmires'
tragedy, and felt a little guilty that one of his own parents might be
alive after all. A document the Baudelaires had found contained a
picture of their parents standing with Jacques Snicket and another
man, with a caption reading "Because of the evidence discussed on page
nine, experts now suspect that there may in fact be one survivor of
the fire, but the survivor's whereabouts are unknown." Klaus had this
document in his pocket right now, along with a few scraps of the
Quagmires' notebooks that they had managed to give him. Klaus walked
beside his older sister, thinking of the puzzle of V.F.D. and how
kindly the Quagmires had tried to help them solve the mystery that
surrounded them all. He was thinking so hard about these things that
when Violet finally broke the silence, it was as if he were waking up
from a long, confusing dream.

"Klaus," she said, "when we were in the caravan, you said you wanted
to tell me something before we tried the invention, but I didn't let
you. What was it?"

"I don't know," Klaus admitted. "I just wanted to say something, in
case--well, in case the invention didn't work." He sighed, and looked
up at the darkening sky. "I don't remember the last thing I said to
Sunny," he said quietly. "It must have been when we were in Madame
Lulu's tent, or maybe outside, just before we stepped into the
caravan. Had I known that Count Olaf was going to take her away, I
would have tried to say something special. I could have complimented
her on the hot chocolate she made, or told her how skillful she was at
staying in disguise."

"You can tell her those things," Violet said, "when we see her again."

"I hope so," Klaus said glumly, "but we're so far behind Olaf and his
troupe."

"But we know where they're going," Violet said, "and we know that he
won't harm a hair on her head. Count Olaf thinks we perished in the
caravan, so he needs Sunny to get his hands on the fortune."

"She's probably unharmed," Klaus agreed, "but I'm sure she's very
frightened. I just hope she knows we're coming after her."

"Me, too," Violet said, and walked in a silence for a while,
interrupted only by the wind and the odd, gurgling noise of the fish.

"I think those fish are having trouble breathing," Klaus said,
pointing into the stream. "Something in the water is making them
cough."

"Maybe the Stricken Stream isn't always that ugly color," Violet said.
"What would turn normal water into grayish black slime?"

"Iron ore," Klaus said thoughtfully, trying to remember a book on
high-altitude environmentalism he had read when he was ten. "Or
perhaps a clay deposit, loosened by an earthquake or another
geological event, or some sort of pollution. There might be an ink or
licorice factory nearby."

"Maybe V.F.D. will tell us," Violet said, "when we reach the
headquarters."

"Maybe one of our parents will tell us," Klaus said quietly.

"We shouldn't get our hopes up," Violet said. "Even if one of our
parents really did survive the fire, and the V.F.D. headquarters
really are at the Valley of Four Drafts, we still don't know that we
will see them when we arrive."

"I don't see the harm in getting our hopes up," Klaus said. "We're
walking along a damaged stream, toward a vicious villain, in an
attempt to rescue our sister and find the headquarters of a secret
organization. I could use a little bit of hope right now."

Violet stopped in her path. "I could use another layer of clothing,"
she said. "It's getting colder."

Klaus nodded in agreement, and held up the garment he was carrying.
"Do you want the poncho," he asked, "or the sweatshirt?"

"The poncho, if you don't mind," Violet said. "After my experience in
the House of Freaks, I don't wish to advertise the Caligari Carnival."

"Me neither," Klaus said, taking the lettered sweatshirt from his
sister. "I think I'll wear it inside out."

Rather than take off their coats and expose themselves to the icy
winds of the Mortmain Mountains, Klaus put on the inside-out
sweatshirt over his coat, and Violet wore the poncho outside hers,
where it hung awkwardly around her. The two elder Baudelaires looked
at one another and had to smile at their ridiculous appearance.

"These are worse than the pinstripe suits Esme' Squalor gave us,"
Violet said.

"Or those itchy sweaters we wore when we stayed with Mr. Poe," Klaus
said, referring to a banker who was in charge of the Baudelaire
fortune, with whom they had lost touch. "But at least we'll keep warm.
If it gets even colder, we can take turns wearing the extra coat."

"If one of our parents is at the headquarters," Violet said, "he or
she might not recognize us underneath all this clothing. We'll look
like two large lumps."

The two Baudelaires looked up at the snow-covered peaks above them and
felt a bit dizzy, not only from the height of the Mortmain Mountains
but from all the questions buzzing around their heads. Could they
really reach the Valley of Four Drafts all by themselves? What would
the headquarters look like? Would V.F.D. be expecting the Baudelaires?
Would Count Olaf have reached the headquarters ahead of them? Would
they find Sunny? Would they find one of their parents? Violet and
Klaus looked at one another in silence and shivered in their strange
clothes, until finally Klaus broke the silence with one more question,
which seemed the dizziest one of all.

"Which parent," he said, "do you think is the survivor?"

Violet opened her mouth to answer, but at that moment another question
immediately occupied the minds of the elder Baudelaires. It is a
dreadful question, and nearly everyone who has found themselves asking
it has ended up wishing that they'd never brought up the subject. My
brother asked the question once, and had nightmares about it for
weeks. An associate of mine asked the question, and found himself
falling through the air before he could hear the answer. It is a
question I asked once, a very long time ago and in a very timid voice,
and a woman replied by quickly putting a motorcycle helmet on her head
and wrapping her body in a red silk cape. The question is, "What in
the world is that ominous-looking cloud of tiny, white buzzing objects
coming toward us?" and I'm sorry to tell you that the answer is "A
swarm of well-organized, illtempered insects known as snow gnats, who
live in cold mountain areas and enjoy stinging people for no reason
whatsoever."

"What in the world," Violet said, "is that ominous-looking cloud of
tiny, white buzzing objects coming toward us?"

Klaus looked in the direction his sister was pointing and frowned. "I
remember reading something in a book on mountainous insect life," he
said, "but I can't quite recall the details."

"Try to remember," Violet said, looking nervously at the approaching
swarm. The ominous-looking cloud of tiny, white buzzing objects had
appeared from around a rocky corner, and from a distance it looked a
bit like the beginnings of a snowfall. But now the snowfall was
organizing itself into the shape of an arrow, and moving toward the
two children, buzzing louder and louder as if it were annoyed. "I
think they might be snow gnats," Klaus said. "Snow gnats live in cold
mountain areas and have been known to group themselves into
well-defined shapes."

Violet looked from the approaching arrow to the waters of the stream
and the steep edge of the mountain peak. "I'm glad gnats are
harmless," she said. "It doesn't look like there's any way to avoid
them."

"There's something else about snow gnats," Klaus said, "that I'm not
quite remembering."

The swarm drew quite close, with the tip of the fluttering white arrow
just a few inches from the Baudelaires' noses, and then stopped in its
path, buzzing angrily. The two siblings stood face-to-face with the
snow gnats for a long, tense second, and the gnat at the very, very
tip of the arrow flew daintily forward and stung Violet on the nose.

"Ow!" Violet said. The snow gnat flew back to its place, and the
eldest Baudelaire was left rubbing a tiny red mark on her nose. "That
hurt," she said. "It feels like a pin stuck me."

"I remember now," Klaus said. "Snow gnats are ill-tempered and enjoy
stinging people for no reason whatso--"

But Klaus did not get to finish his sentence, because the snow gnats
interrupted and gave a ghastly demonstration of just what he was
talking about. Curling lazily in the mountain winds, the arrow twisted
and became a large buzzing circle, and the gnats began to spin around
and around the two Baudelaires like a well-organized and illtempered
hula hoop. Each gnat was so tiny that the children could not see any
of its features, but they felt as if the insects were smiling nastily.

"Are the stings poisonous?" Violet asked.

"Mildly," Klaus said. "We'll be all right if we get stung a few times,
but many stings could make us very ill. Ow!"

One of the gnats had flown up and stung Klaus on the cheek, as if it
were seeing if the middle Baudelaire was fun to hurt. "People always
say that if you don't bother stinging insects, they won't bother you,"
Violet said nervously. "Ow!"

"That's scarcely ever true," Klaus said, "and it's certainly not true
with snow gnats. Ow! Ow! Ow!"

"What should we--Ow!" Violet half asked.

"I don't--Ow!" Klaus half answered, but in moments the Baudelaires did
not have time for even half a conversation. The circle of snow gnats
began spinning faster and faster, and the insects spread themselves
out so it looked as if the two siblings were in the middle of a tiny,
white tornado. Then, in a series of maneuvers that must have taken a
great deal of rehearsal, the gnats began stinging the Baudelaires,
first on one side and then on the other. Violet shrieked as several
gnats stung her chin. Klaus shouted as a handful of gnats stung his
left ear. And both Baudelaires cried out as they tried to wave the
gnats away only to feel the stingers all over their waving hands. The
snow gnats stung to the left, and stung to the right. They approached
the Baudelaires from above, making the children duck, and then from
below, making the children stand on tiptoe in an effort to avoid them.
And all the while, the swarm buzzed louder and louder, as if wishing
to remind the Baudelaires how much fun the insects were having. Violet
and Klaus closed their eyes and stood together, too scared to walk
blindly and find themselves falling off a mountain peak or sinking
into the waters of the Stricken Stream.

"Coat!" Klaus managed to shout, then spit out a gnat that had flown
into his open mouth in the hopes of stinging his tongue. Violet
understood at once, and grabbed the extra coat in her hands and draped
it over Klaus and herself like a large, limp umbrella of cloth. The
snow gnats buzzed furiously, trying to get inside to continue stinging
them, but had to settle for stinging the Baudelaires' hands as they
held the coat in place. Violet and Klaus looked at one another dimly
underneath the coat, wincing as their fingers were stung, and tried to
keep walking.

"We'll never reach the Valley of Four Drafts like this," Violet said,
speaking louder than usual over the buzzing of the gnats. "How can we
stop them, Klaus?"

"Fire drives them away," Klaus said. "In the book I read, the author
said that even the smell of smoke can keep a whole swarm at bay. But
we can't start a fire underneath a coat."

"Ow!" A snow gnat stung Violet's thumb on a spot that had already been
stung, just as the Baudelaires rounded the rocky corner where the
swarm had first appeared. Through a worn spot in the fabric, the
Baudelaires could just make out a dark, circular hole in the side of
the mountain.

"That must be an entrance to one of the caves," Klaus said. "Could we
start a fire in there?"

"Maybe," Violet said. "And maybe we'd annoy a hibernating animal."

"We've already managed to annoy thousands of animals," Klaus said,
almost dropping the pitcher as a gnat stung his wrist. "I don't think
we have much choice. I think, we have to head into the cave and take
our chances."

Violet nodded in agreement, but looked nervously at the entrance to
the cave. Taking one's chances is like taking a bath, because
sometimes you end up feeling comfortable and warm, and sometimes there
is something terrible lurking around that you cannot see until it is
too late and you can do nothing else but scream and cling to a plastic
duck. The two Baudelaires walked carefully toward the dark, circular
hole, making sure to stay clear of the nearby edge of the peak and
pulling the coat tightly around them so the snow gnats could not find
a way inside, but what worried them most was not the height of the
peak or the stingers of the gnats but the chances they were taking as
they ducked inside the gloomy entrance of the cave.

The two Baudelaires had never been in this cave before, of course, and
as far as I have been able to ascertain, they were never in it again,
even on their way back down the mountain, after they had been reunited
with their baby sister and learned the secret of Verbal Fridge
Dialogue. And yet, as Violet and Klaus took their chances and walked
inside, they found two things with which they were familiar. The first
was fire. As they stood inside the entrance to the cave, the siblings
realized at once that there was no need to worry about the snow gnats
any longer, because they could smell nearby smoke, and even see, at a
great distance, small orange flames toward the back of the cave. Fire,
of course, was very familiar to the children, from the ashen smell of
the remains of the Baudelaire mansion to the scent of the flames that
destroyed Caligari Carnival. But as the snow gnats formed an arrow and
darted away from the cave and the Baudelaires took another step
inside, Violet and Klaus found another familiar thing--a familiar
person, to be exact, who they had thought they would never see again.

"Hey you cakesniffers!" said a voice from the back of the cave, and
the sound was almost enough to make the two Baudelaires wish they had
taken their chances someplace else.


CHAPTER THREE

You may well wonder why there has been no account of Sunny Baudelaire
in the first two chapters of this book, but there are several reasons
why this is so. For one thing, Sunny's journey in Count Olaf's car was
much more difficult to research. The tracks made by the tires of the
car have vanished long ago, and so many blizzards and avalanches have
occurred in the Mortmain Mountains that even the road itself has
largely disappeared. The few witnesses to Olaf's journey have mostly
died under mysterious circumstances, or were too frightened to answer
the letters, telegrams, and greeting cards I sent them requesting an
interview. And even the litter that was thrown out the window of
Olaf's car--the clearest sign that evil people have driven by--was
picked up off the road long before my work began. The missing litter
is a good sign, as it indicates that certain animals of the Mortmain
Mountains have returned to their posts and are rebuilding their nests,
but it has made it very hard for me to write a complete account of
Sunny's travels.

But if you are interested in knowing how Sunny Baudelaire spent her
time while her siblings stopped the caravan, followed the path of the
Stricken Stream, and struggled against the snow gnats, there is
another story you might read that describes more or less the same
situation. The story concerns a person named Cinderella. Cinderella
was a young person who was placed in the care of various wicked people
who teased her and forced her to do all the chores. Eventually
Cinderella was rescued by her fairy godmother, who magically created a
special outfit for Cinderella to wear to a ball where she met a
handsome prince, married him soon afterward, and lived happily ever
after in a castle. If you substitute the name "Cinderella" with the
name "Sunny Baudelaire," and eliminate the fairy godmother, the
special outfit, the ball, the handsome prince, the marriage, and
living happily ever after in a castle, you will have a clear idea of
Sunny's predicament.

"I wish the baby orphan would stop that irritating crying," Count Olaf
said, wrinkling his one eyebrow as the car made another violent turn.
"Nothing spoils a nice car trip like a whiny kidnapping victim."

"I'm pinching her as often as I can," Esme' Squalor said, and gave
Sunny another pinch with her stylish fingernails, "but she still won't
shut up."

"Listen, toothy," Olaf said, taking his eyes off the road to glare at
Sunny. "If you don't stop crying, I'll give you something to cry
about."

Sunny gave a little whimper of annoyance, and wiped her eyes with her
tiny hands. It was true that she had been crying for most of the day,
thoroughout a long drive that even the most dedicated of researchers
would be unable to trace, and now as the sun set, she still had not
been able to stop herself. But at Count Olaf's words, she was almost
more irritated than frightened. It is always tedious when someone says
that if you don't stop crying, they will give you something to cry
about, because if you are crying than you already have something to
cry about, and so there is no reason for them to give you anything
additional to cry about, thank you very much. Sunny Baudelaire
certainly felt she had sufficient reason to weep. She was worried
about her siblings, and wondered how they were going to stop the
runaway caravan from hurtling them to their doom. She was frightened
for herself, now that Count Olaf had discovered her disguise, torn off
her beard, and trapped her on Esme''s lap. And she was in pain, from
the constant pinching of the villain's girlfriend. "No pinch," she
said to Esme', but the wicked and stylish woman just frowned as if
Sunny had spoken nonsense.

"When she's not crying," Esme' said, "the baby talks in some foreign
language. I can't understand a thing she's saying."

"Kidnapped children are never any fun," said the hook-handed man, who
was perhaps Sunny's least favorite of Olaf's troupe. "Remember when we
had the Quagmires in our clutches, boss? They did nothing but
complain. They complained when we put them in a cage. They complained
when we trapped them inside a fountain. Complain, complain,
complain--I was so sick of them I was almost glad when they escaped
from our clutches."

"Glad?" Count Olaf said with a snarl. "We worked hard to steal the
Quagmire fortune, and we didn't get a single sapphire. That was a real
waste of time."

"Don't blame yourself, Olaf," said one of the white-faced women from
the back seat. "Everybody makes mistakes."

"Not this time," Olaf said. "With the two orphans squashed someplace
underneath a crashed caravan and the baby orphan on your lap, the
Baudelaire fortune is mine. And once we reach the Valley of Four
Drafts and find the headquarters, all our worries will be over."

"Why?" asked Hugo, the hunchbacked man who had previously been
employed at the carnival.

"Yes, please explain," said Kevin, another former carnival worker. At
Caligari Carnival, Kevin had been embarrassed to be ambidextrous, but
Esme' had lured him into joining Olaf's troupe by tying Kevin's right
hand behind his back, so no one would know it was as strong as his
left. "Remember, boss, we're new to the troupe, so we don't always
know what's going on."

"I remember when I first joined Olaf's troupe," the other white-faced
woman said. "I'd never even heard of the Snicket file."

"Working for me is a hands-on learning experience," Olaf said. "You
can't rely on me to explain everything to you. I'm a very busy man."

"I'll explain it, boss," said the hook-handed man. "Count Olaf, like
any good businessman, has committed a wide variety of crimes."

"But these stupid volunteers have gathered all sorts of evidence and
filed it away," Esme' said. "I tried to explain that crime is very in
right now, but apparently they weren't interested."

Sunny wiped another tear from her eye and sighed. The youngest
Baudelaire thought she'd almost rather be pinched again than hear any
more of Esme' Squalor's nonsense about what was in--the word that
Esme' used for "fashionable"--and what was out.

"We need to destroy those files, or Count Olaf could be arrested," the
hook-handed man said. "We have reason to believe that some of the
files are at V.F.D. headquarters."

"What does V.F.D. stand for?" The voice of Colette came from the floor
of the automobile. Count Olaf had ordered her to use her skills as a
carnival contortionist to curl up at the feet of the other members of
the troupe.

"That's top-secret information!" Olaf growled, to Sunny's
disappointment. "I used to be a member of the organization myself, but
I found it was more fun to be an individual practitioner."

"What does that mean?" asked the hook-handed man.

"It means a life of crime," Esme' replied. "It's very in right now."

"Wrong def." Sunny could not help speaking through her tears. By
"wrong def she meant something along the lines of, "An individual
practitioner means someone who works alone, instead of with a group,
and it has nothing to do with a life of crime," and it made her sad
that there was no one around who could understand her.

"There you go, babbling away," Esme' said. "This is why I never want
to have children. Except as servants, of course."

"This journey is easier than I thought," Olaf said. "The map says we
just have to pass a few more caves."

"Is there an in hotel near the headquarters?" Esme' asked.

"I'm afraid not, sweetheart," the villain replied, "but I have two
tents in the trunk of the car. We'll be camping on Mount Fraught, the
summit of the Mortmain Mountains."

"The summit?" Esme' said. "It'll be cold at the highest peak."

"It's true," Olaf admitted, "but False Spring is on its way, so before
long it'll be a bit warmer."

"But what about tonight?" Esme' Squalor said. "It is definitely not in
for me to set up tents in the freezing cold."

Count Olaf looked at his girlfriend and began to laugh, and Sunny
could smell the foul breath of his nasty giggles. "Don't be silly,"
the villain said finally. "You're not going to set up the tents,
Esme'. You're going to stay nice and toasty in the car. The
bucktoothed baby will set up the tents for us."

Now Olaf's entire troupe laughed, and the car filled with the stench
of so many villains' bad breath. Sunny felt a few more tears roll down
her face, and turned to the window so no one would see. The car's
windows were very dirty, but the youngest Baudelaire could see the
strange, square peaks of the Mortmain Mountains and the dark waters of
the Stricken Stream. By now the car had driven so high up in the
mountains that the stream was mostly ice, and Sunny looked at the wide
stripe of frozen blackness and wondered where her siblings were, and
if they were coming to rescue her. She remembered the other time she
had been in Count Olaf's clutches, when the villain had tied her up,
locked her in a cage and dangled her outside his tower room as part of
one of his schemes. It had been an absolutely terrifying experience
for the youngest Baudelaire, and she often still had nightmares about
the creaking of he cage and the distant sight of her two siblings
looking up at her from Count Olaf's backyard. But Violet had built a
grappling hook to rescue her, and Klaus had done some important legal
research to defeat Olaf's scheme. As the car took Sunny farther and
farther away from her siblings, and she stared out at the lonesome
terrain, she knew that they could save her again.

"How long will we stay on Mount Fraught ?" Hugo asked.

"Until I say so, of course," Count Olaf replied.

"You'll soon find out that much of this job involves a lot of waiting
around," the hookhanded man said. "I usually keep something around to
help pass the time, like a deck of cards or a large rock."

"It can be dull," admitted one of the white-faced women, "and it can
be dangerous. Several of our comrades have recently suffered terrible
fates."

"It was worth it," Count Olaf said nonchalantly, a word which here
means "in a tone of voice that indicated he didn't care one bit about
his deceased employees." "Sometimes a few people need to die in fires
or get eaten by lions, if it's all for the greater good."

"What's the greater good?" asked Colette.

"Money!" Esme' cried in greedy glee. "Money and personal satisfaction,
and we're going to get both of those things out of this whimpering
baby on my lap! Once we have our hands on the Baudelaire fortune,
we'll have enough money to live a life of luxury and plan several more
treacherous schemes!"

The entire troupe cheered, and Count Olaf gave Sunny a filthy grin,
but did not say anything more as the car raced up a steep, bumpy hill,
and at last screeched to a halt, just as the last rays of the sun
faded into the evening sky. "We're here at last," Count Olaf said, and
handed the car keys to Sunny. "Get out, baby orphan. Unload everything
from the trunk and set up the tents."

"And bring us some potato chips," Esme' said, "so we'll have something
in to eat while we wait."

Esme' opened the door of the car, placed Sunny on the frozen ground,
and slammed the door shut again. Instantly, the chilly mountain air
surrounded the youngest Baudelaire and made her shiver. It was so
bitterly cold at the highest peak of the Mortmain Mountains that her
tears froze in their tracks, forming a tiny mask of ice all over her
face. Unsteadily, Sunny rose to her feet and walked to the back of the
car. She was tempted to keep walking, and escape from Olaf while he
waited in the car with his troupe. But where could she go? Sunny
looked around at her surroundings and could not see a place where a
baby would be safe by herself.

The summit of Mount Fraught was a small, flat square, and as Sunny
walked to the trunk of the car, she gazed off each edge of the square,
feeling a bit dizzy from the great height. From three of the edges,
she could see the square and misty peaks of some of the other
mountains, most of which were covered in snow, and twisting through
the peaks were the strange, black waters of the Stricken Stream, and
the rocky path that the car had driven along. But from the fourth side
of the square peak, Sunny saw something so strange it took her a
moment to figure out what it was.

Extending from the highest peak in the Mortmain Mountains was a
glittering white strip, like an enormous piece of shiny paper folded
downward, or the wing of some tremendous bird. Sunny watched the very
last rays of the sunset reflect off this enormous surface and slowly
realized what it was: the source of the Stricken Stream.

Like many streams, the Stricken Stream originated within the rocks of
the mountains, and in the warmer season, Sunny could see that it
cascaded down from the highest peak in an enormous waterfall. But this
was not a warm time of year, and just as Sunny's tears had frozen on
her face, the waterfall had frozen solid, into a long, slippery slope
that disappeared into the darkness below. It was such an eerie sight
that it took Sunny a moment to wonder why the ice was white, instead
of black like the waters of the Stricken Stream.

Honk! A loud blast from Count Olaf's horn made Sunny remember what she
was supposed to be doing, and she hurriedly opened the trunk and found
a bag of potato chips, which she brought back to the car. "That took a
very long time, orphan," said Olaf, rather than "Thank you." "Now go
set up the tents, one for Esme' and me and one for my troupe, so we
can get some sleep."

"Where is the baby going to stay?" asked the hook-handed man. "I don't
want her in my tent. I hear that babies can creep up and steal your
breath while you're sleeping."

"Well, she's certainly not sleeping with me," Esme' said. "It's not in
to have a baby in your tent."

"She's not going to sleep in either tent," Olaf decided. "There's a
large covered casserole dish in the trunk. She can sleep in there."

"Will she be safe in a casserole dish?" Esme' said. "Remember, Olaf
honey, if she dies then we can't get our hands on the fortune."

"There are a few holes in the top so she can breathe," Olaf said, "and
the cover will protect her from the snow gnats."

"Snow gnats?" asked Hugo.

"Snow gnats are well-organized, ill-tempered insects," Count Olaf
explained, "who live in cold mountain areas and enjoy stinging people
for no reason whatsoever. I've always been fond of them."

"Nonat," Sunny said, which meant "I didn't notice any such insects
outside," but no one paid any attention.

"Won't she run away if no one's watching her?" asked Kevin.

"She wouldn't dare," Count Olaf said, "and even if she tried to
survive in the mountains by herself, we could see where she went.
That's why we're staying here at the summit. We'll know if the brat
escapes, or if anyone's coming after us, because we can see everything
and everyone for miles and miles."

"Eureka," Sunny said, before she could stop herself. She meant
something along the lines of, "I've just realized something," but she
had not meant to say it out loud.

"Stop your babbling and get busy, you fanged brat!" Esme' Squalor
said, and slammed the car door shut. Sunny could hear the laughing of
the troupe and the crunching of potato chips as she walked slowly back
to the trunk to find the tents.

It is often quite frustrating to arrange all of the cloth and the
poles so that a tent works correctly, which is why I have always
preferred to stay in hotels or rented castles, which also have the
added attractions of solid walls and maid service. Sunny, of course,
had the extra disadvantages of trying to do it herself, in the dark,
when she was still fairly new at walking and was worried about her
siblings. But the youngest Baudelaire had a history of performing
Herculean tasks, a phrase which here means "managing to do incredibly
difficult things." As I'm sure you know, if you are ever forced to do
something very difficult, it often helps to think of something
inspiring to keep you going. When Sunny had engaged in a sword-and-
tooth fight at Lucky Smells Lumbermill, for instance, she thought of
how much she cared for her siblings, and it helped her defeat the evil
Dr. Orwell. When Sunny climbed up an elevator shaft at 667 Dark Avenue
, she had concentrated on her friends the Quagmires, and how much she
wanted to rescue them, and before too long she had reached the
penthouse apartment. So, as Sunny dug a hole in the frozen ground with
her teeth so the tent poles would stay in place, she thought of
something that inspired her, and oddly enough it was something that
Count Olaf had said, about being able to see everything and everyone
for miles and miles. As Sunny assembled the tents, and gazed down
every so often at the slippery slope of the frozen waterfall, she
decided that she would not try to sneak away from Olaf and his troupe.
She would not to try to sneak anywhere. Because if you could see
everything and everyone from Mount Fraught, that also meant everything
and everyone, including Violet and Klaus Baudelaire, would be able to
see her.


CHAPTER FOUR

That night was a dark day. Of course, all nights are dark days,
because night is simply a badly lit version of day, due to the fact
that the Earth travels around and around the sun reminding everyone
that it is time to get out of bed and start the day with a cup of
coffee or a secret message folded up into a paper airplane that can
sail out the barred window of a ranger station. But in this case, the
phrase "a dark day" means "a sad time in the history of the Baudelaire
children, V.F.D., and all kind, brave, and wellread people in the
world." But Violet and Klaus Baudelaire, of course, had no idea of the
catastrophe occurring high above them in the Valley of Four Drafts.
All they knew was that they were hearing a voice they had hoped never
to hear again.

"Go away, cakesniffers!" the voice said. "This is a private cave!"

"Who are you talking to, Carmelita?" asked another voice. This voice
was much louder, and sounded like it belonged to a grown man.

"I can see two shadows in the entrance of the cave, Uncle Bruce," said
the first voice, "and to me they look like cakesniffers."

The back of the cave echoed with giggling, and Violet and Klaus looked
at one another in dismay. The familiar voice belonged to Carmelita
Spats, the nasty little girl whom the Baudelaires had encountered at
Prufrock Preparatory School. Carmelita had taken an instant dislike to
the three siblings, calling them unpleasant names and generally making
life miserable at the academy. If you have ever been a student, then
you know that there is usually one such person at every school and
that once you have graduated you hope never to see them again. The two
elder Baudelaires had enough troubles in the Mortmain Mountains
without running into this unpleasant person, and at the sound of her
voice they almost turned around and took their chances once more with
the snow gnats swarming outside.

"Two shadows?" asked the second voice. "Identify yourselves, please."

"We're mountain travelers," Violet called from the entrance. "We lost
our way and ran into a swarm of snow gnats. Please let us rest here
for a moment, while the smell of smoke scares them away, and then
we'll be on our way."

"Absolutely not!" replied Carmelita, who sounded even nastier than
usual. "This is where the Snow Scouts are camping, on their way to
celebrate False Spring and crown me queen. We don't want any
cakesniffers spoiling our fun."

"Now, now, Carmelita," said the voice of the grown man. "Snow Scouts
are supposed to be accommodating, remember? It's part of the Snow
Scout Alphabet Pledge. And it would be very accommodating of us to
offer these strangers the shelter of our cave."

"I don't want to be accommodating," Carmelita said. "I'm the False
Spring Queen, so I get to do whatever I want."

"You're not the False Spring Queen yet, Carmelita," came the patient
voice of a young boy. "Not until we dance around the Spring-pole. Do
come in, travelers, and sit by the fire. We're happy to accommodate
you."

"That's the spirit, kid," said the voice of the grown man. "Come on,
Snow Scouts, let's all say the Snow Scout Alphabet Pledge together."

Instantly the cave echoed with the sound of many voices speaking in
perfect unison, a phrase which here means "reciting a list of very odd
words at the very same time."

"Snow Scouts," recited the Snow Scouts, "are accommodating, basic,
calm, darling, emblematic, frisky, grinning, human, innocent, jumping,
kept, limited, meek, naploving, official, pretty, quarantined, recent,
scheduled, tidy, understandable, victorious, wholesome, xylophone,
young, and zippered--every morning, every afternoon, every night, and
all day long!"

The two Baudelaires looked at one another in confusion. Like many
pledges, the Snow Scout Alphabet Pledge had not made much sense, and
Violet and Klaus tried to imagine how a scout could be "calm" and
"meek" at the same time as being "frisky" and "jumping," or how all
these children could avoid being "young" or "human," even if they
wanted to. They couldn't figure out why the pledge suggested being all
these things "every morning," "every afternoon," and "every night,"
and then added "all day long," or why the word "xylophone" appeared in
the pledge at all. But they did not have much time to wonder, because
when the pledge was over, the Snow Scouts all took a big breath and
made a long, airy sound, as if they were imitating the wind outside,
and this seemed even more strange.

"That's my favorite part," said the voice of the grown man, when the
sound faded away. "There's nothing like ending the Snow Scout Alphabet
Pledge with a snowy sound. Now approach, travelers, so we can get a
look at you."

"Let's keep the coat over our faces," Klaus whispered to his sister.
"Carmelita might recognize us."

"And the other scouts have probably seen our pictures in The Daily
Punctilio" Violet said, and ducked her head underneath the coat. The
Daily Punctilio was a newspaper that had published a story blaming the
three Baudelaires for Jacques Snicket's murder. The story was utter
nonsense, of course, but it seemed that everyone in the world had
believed it and was searching for the Baudelaires to put them in jail.
As the two siblings walked toward the voices of the Snow Scouts,
however, they realized that they weren't the only ones concealing
their faces.

The back of the cave was like a large, circular room, with very high
ceilings and craggy walls of rock that flickered in the orange light
of the flames. Seated in a circle around the fire were fifteen or
twenty people, all looking up at the two Baudelaires. Through the
fabric of the coat, the children could see that one person was much
taller than the others--this was probably Bruce--and was wearing an
ugly plaid coat and holding a large cigar. On the opposite side of the
circle was someone wearing a thick wool sweater with several large
pockets, and the rest of the Snow Scouts were wearing bright white
uniforms with enormous zippers down the front and emblems of
snowflakes, in all different sizes and shapes, along the long, puffy
sleeves. On the back of the uniforms, the Baudelaires could see the
words of the Snow Scout Alphabet Pledge printed in large pink letters,
and on the top of everyone's heads were white headbands with tiny
plastic snowflakes sticking out of the top in all directions and the
word "Brr!" written in icy script. But Violet and Klaus weren't
looking at the plastic flurries of snow on the Snow Scouts' heads, or
the accommodating, basic, calm, darling, emblematic, frisky, grinning,
human, innocent, jumping, kept, limited, meek, nap-loving, official,
pretty, quarantined, recent, scheduled, tidy, understandable,
victorious, wholesome, xylophone, young, and zippered uniforms that
most everyone was wearing. They were looking at the dark, round masks
that were covering the scouts' faces. The masks were covered in tiny
holes, much like masks worn for fencing, a sport in which people
swordfight for fun rather than for honor or in order to rescue a
writer who has been taped to the wall. But in the flickering light of
the cave, the Baudelaires could not see the holes, and it looked like
the faces of Bruce and the Snow Scouts had vanished, leaving a dark
and empty hole above their necks.

"You cakesniffers look ridiculous," said one of the scouts, and the
Baudelaires knew at once which masked figure was Carmelita Spats.
"Your faces are all covered up."

"We're meek," Violet said, thinking quickly. "In fact, we're so meek
that we hardly ever show our faces."

"Then you'll fit in just fine," said Bruce from behind his mask. "The
name's Bruce, but you can call me Uncle Bruce, although I'm almost
certainly not your real uncle. Welcome to the Snow Scouts, travelers,
where all of us are meek. In fact, we're accommodating, basic,
calm..."

The other Snow Scouts all joined in the pledge, and the two elder
Baudelaires stood through another rendition of the absurd list, while
the scout in the sweater stood up and stepped toward them. "We have
some spare masks over there," he murmured quietly, and gestured toward
a large pile of equipment, stacked beside a very long wooden pole.
"They'll keep the snow gnats away when you go back outside. Help
yourself."

"Thank you," Violet replied, as the scouts promised to be kept,
limited, and meek. She and her brother quickly grabbed masks and put
them on underneath the coat, so that by the time the scouts vowed to
be xylophone, young, and zippered, they looked as faceless as everyone
else in the cave.

"That was fun, kids," said Bruce, as the snowy sound faded and the
pledge was over.

"Now why don't you two join the Snow Scouts? We're an organization for
young people to have fun and learn new things. Right now we're on a
Snow Scout Hike. We're going to hike all the way up to Mount Fraught
in order to celebrate False Spring."

"What's False Spring?" Violet asked, sitting down between her brother
and the sweatered scout.

"Anybody who's not a cakesniffer knows what False Spring is,"
Carmelita said in a scornful voice. "It's when the weather gets
unusually warm before getting very cold again. We celebrate it with a
fancy dance where we spin around and around the Springpole." She
pointed to the wooden pole, and the Baudelaires noticed that the Snow
Scouts all wore bright white mittens, each emblazoned with an S. "When
the dance is over, we choose the best Snow Scout and crown her the
False Spring Queen. This time, it's me. In fact, it's always me."

"That's because Uncle Bruce is really your uncle," said one of the
other Snow Scouts.

"No, it's not," Carmelita insisted. "It's because I'm the most
accommodating, basic, calm, darling, emblematic, frisky, grinning,
human, innocent, jumping, kept, limited, meek, nap-loving, official,
pretty, quarantined, recent, scheduled, tidy, understandable,
victorious, wholesome, xylophone, young, and zippered."

"How can anyone be 'xylophone'?" Klaus couldn't help asking.
"'Xylophone' isn't even an adjective."

"Uncle Bruce couldn't think of another word that began with X,"
explained the sweatered Snow Scout, in a tone of voice indicating that
he thought this wasn't a very good excuse.

"How about 'xenial'?" Klaus suggested. "It's a word that means--"

"You can't change the words of the Snow Scout Alphabet Pledge," Bruce
interrupted, moving his cigar toward his face as if he were going to
try to smoke it through the mask. "The whole point of the Snow Scouts
is that you do the same thing over and over. We celebrate False Spring
over and over, on Mount Fraught, at the source of the Stricken Stream.
My niece Carmelita Spats is False Spring Queen, over and over. And
over and over, we stop here in this cave for Snow Scout Story Time."

"I read that the caves of the Mortmain Mountains contained hibernating
animals," Klaus said. "Are you sure it's safe to stop here?"

The Snow Scout who was wearing a sweater instead of a uniform turned
his head quickly to the Baudelaires, as if he was going to speak, but
Bruce answered first. "It's safe now, kid," he said. "Years ago,
apparently these mountains were crawling with bears. The bears were so
intelligent that they were trained as soldiers. But they disappeared
and no one knows why."

"Not bears," the scout in the sweater said, so quietly that the two
Baudelaires had to lean in to hear him. "Lions lived in these caves.
And they weren't soldiers. The lions were detectives--volunteer feline
detectives." He turned so his mask was facing the two siblings, and
the children knew he must be staring at them through the holes.
"Volunteer Feline Detectives," he said again, and the Baudelaires
almost gasped.

"Did you say--" Violet said, but the sweatered Snow Scout shook his
head as if it was not safe to talk. Violet looked at her brother and
then at the scout, wishing she could see both of their faces behind
their masks. The initials of "Volunteer Feline Detectives," of course,
spelled "V.F.D.," the name of the organization they were looking for.
But were these initials a coincidence, as they had seemed to be so
many times? Or was this mysterious scout giving them some sort of
signal?

"I don't know what you kids are muttering about," Bruce said, "but
stop it this instant. It's not time for conversation. It's Snow Scout
Story Time, when one Snow Scout tells a story to the other Snow
Scouts. Then we'll all eat marshmallows until we feel sick and go to
sleep on a heap of blankets, just like we do every year. Why don't our
new scouts tell the first story?"

"I should tell the first story," whined Carmelita. "After all, I'm the
False Spring Queen."

"But I'm sure the travelers will have a wonderful story to tell," the
sweatered scout said. "I'd love to hear a Very Fascinating Drama."

Klaus saw his sister raise her hands to her head and smiled. He knew
Violet had instinctively begun to tie her hair up in a ribbon to help
her think, but it was impossible to do so with a mask on. Both the
Baudelaire minds were racing to figure out a way to communicate with
this mysterious scout, and the children were so lost in thought that
they scarcely heard Carmelita Spats insulting them.

"Stop sitting around, cakesniffers," Carmelita said. "If you're going
to tell us a story, get started."

"I'm sorry for the delay," Violet said, choosing her words as
carefully as she could. "We haven't had a Very Fun Day, so it's
difficult to think of a good story."

"I didn't realize this was a sad occasion," said the sweatered scout.


"Oh, yes," Klaus said. "We've had nothing to eat all day except for
some Vinegar-Flavored Doughnuts."

"And then there were the snow gnats," Violet said. "They behaved like
Violent Frozen Dragonflies."

"When they form an arrow," Klaus said, "they're more like a Voracious
Fierce Dragon."

"Or a Vain Fat Dictator, I imagine," the scout in the sweater said,
and gave the Baudelaires a masked nod as if he had received their
message.

"This is the most boring story I have ever heard," Carmelita Spats
said. "Uncle Bruce, tell these two that they're both cakesniffers."

"Well, it wouldn't be very accommodating to say so," Bruce said, "but
I must admit that the story you were telling was a little dull, kids.
When Snow Scouts tell stories, they skip everything boring and only
tell the interesting parts. That way, the story can be as
accommodating, basic, calm, darling, emblematic, frisky, grinning,
human, innocent, jumping, kept, limited, meek, nap-loving, official,
pretty, quarantined, recent, scheduled, tidy, understandable,
victorious, wholesome, xylophone, young, and zippered as possible."

"I'll show these cakesniffers how to tell an interesting story,"
Carmelita said. "Once upon a time, I woke up and looked in the mirror,
and there I saw the prettiest, smartest, most darling girl in the
whole wide world. I put on a lovely pink dress to make myself look
even prettier, and I skipped off to school where my teacher told me I
looked more adorable than anyone she had ever seen in her entire life,
and she gave me a lollipop as a special present.. ."

At this point, I will take a page from someone's book, a phrase which
here means "adopt an idea used by somebody else." If, for instance, a
man told you that the best way to write thank-you notes is to reward
yourself with a cookie every time you finished one, you might take a
page from his book, and have a plate of cookies nearby after your
birthday or some other gift-giving occasion. If a girl told you that
the best way to sneak out of the house late at night is to make sure
everyone else is sound asleep, you might take a page from her book and
mix a sleeping potion into everyone else's after-dinner coffee before
climbing down the ivy that grows outside your bedroom window. And if
you have been reading this miserable story, then the next time you
find yourself in a similar situation, you might take a page from The
Slippery Slope and use a combination of sticky substances and a drag
chute to slow down a racing caravan, and then retrieve several
articles of heavy clothing in order to protect yourself from the cold,
and find a cave full of Snow Scouts gathered around a fire when the
snow gnats begin to swarm.

But I will be taking a page from Bruce's book, when he suggested that
a storyteller only tell the interesting parts of the story and skip
everything boring. Certainly the two elder Baudelaires wished they
could skip this boring part of their own story, as they were very
eager to leave the cave and resume their search for their sister. But
Violet and Klaus knew that they shouldn't leave the cave until they
could talk to the mysterious boy in the sweater, and that they
couldn't talk to the mysterious boy in the sweater in front of Bruce
and the other Snow Scouts, and so they sat by the fire as Carmelita
Spats talked on and on about how pretty and smart and darling she was
and how everyone she met told her that she was unbelievably adorable.
Although the Baudelaires had to sit through these tedious portions of
their story, there is no reason for you to do so, and so I will skip
ahead, past the tiresome details of Carmelita's endless story, and the
senseless pledge that Bruce made everyone say several more times, and
the all-marshmallow meal that the scouts shared with the two siblings.
I will skip how irksome it was for Violet and Klaus to turn away from
the scouts, quickly lift their masks, and pop marshmallows into their
mouths before covering their faces again so they would not be
recognized. After their long, tiring journey, the children would have
preferred a more substantial supper and a less complicated way of
eating it, but the siblings could not skip these parts of their story,
so they had to wait for the evening to pass and for all the other Snow
Scouts to feel sick and arrange blankets into a large heap beside the
Springpole. Even when Bruce led the Snow Scouts in one more alphabet
pledge as a way of saying good night, Violet and Klaus dared not get
up and talk to the sweatered scout for fear of being overheard, and
they had to wait for hours, too curious and anxious to sleep, as the
fire died down and the cave echoed with the sounds of Snow Scout
snoring. But I will take a page from the book of the Snow Scout
leader, and skip ahead to the next interesting thing that happened,
which was very, very late at night, when so many interesting parts of
stories happen and so many people miss them because they are asleep in
their beds, or hiding in the broom closet of a mustard factory,
disguised as a dustpan to fool the night watchwoman.

It was very late at night--in fact one might say that it was the
darkest part of this dark day--and it was so late that the Baudelaires
had almost given up on staying awake, particularly after such an
exhausting day, but just as the two siblings were beginning to fall
asleep, they each felt a hand touch them on the shoulder, and they
quickly sat up and found themselves looking into the masked face of
the sweatered scout. "Come with me, Baudelaires," the boy said in a
very quiet voice. "I know a shortcut to the headquarters," and this
was an interesting part of the story indeed.


CHAPTER FIVE

When you have many questions on your mind, and you suddenly have an
opportunity to ask them, the questions tend to crowd together and trip
over one another, much like passengers on a crowded train when it
reaches a popular station. With Bruce and the Snow Scouts asleep, the
two elder Baudelaires finally had an opportunity to talk with the
mysterious scout in the sweater, but everything they wanted to ask
seemed hopelessly entangled.

"How--" Violet started, but the question "How did you know we were the
Baudelaires?" stumbled against the question "Who are you?" and fell
back against the questions "Are you a member of V.F.D.?" and "What
does V.F.D. stand for?"

"Do--" Klaus said, but the question "Do you know where our sister is?"
tripped over the question "Do you know if one of our parents is
alive?" which was already struggling with "How can we get to the
headquarters?" and "Will my sisters and I ever find a safe place to
live without constantly being threatened by Count Olaf and his troupe
as they hatch plan after plan to steal the Baudelaire fortune?"
although the middle Baudelaire knew that his last question was
unlikely to be answered at all.

"I'm sure you have lots of questions," the boy whispered, "but we
can't talk here. Bruce is a light sleeper, and he's caused V.F.D.
enough trouble already without learning another of our secrets. I
promise all your questions will be answered, but first we've got to
get to the headquarters. Come with me."

Without another word, the sweatered scout turned around, and the
Baudelaires saw he was wearing a backpack inscribed with an insignia
they had seen at Caligari Carnival. At first glance, this insignia
merely appeared to be an eye, but the children had discovered that if
you looked closely you could see the initials V.F.D., cleverly hidden
in the drawing. The scout began to walk, and the two siblings got out
of their blankets as quietly as they could and followed him. To their
surprise, he did not lead them toward the cave entrance, but to the
back of the cave, where the Snow Scouts' fire had been. Now it was
nothing more than a pile of gray ashes, although it was still very
warm, and the smell of smoke was still in the air. The sweatered scout
reached into his pocket and brought out a flashlight.

"I had to wait for the fire to die down before I showed you," he said,
and with a nervous glance at the sleeping scouts, turned the
flashlight on and shone it above them. "Look." Violet and Klaus
looked, and saw that there was a hole in the ceiling, big enough for a
person to crawl through. The last wisps of smoke from the fire were
floating up into the hole.

"A chimney," Klaus murmured. "I was wondering why the fire didn't fill
the cave with smoke."

"The official name is Vertical Flame Diversion," the scout whispered.
"It serves as a chimney and as a secret passageway. It runs from this
cave to the Valley of Four Drafts. If we climb up there, we can reach
headquarters within hours, instead of hiking all the way up the
mountain. Years ago, there was a metal pole that ran down the center
of the hole, so people could slide down and hide in this cave in case
of an emergency. The pole is gone now, but there should be carved
toeholds in the sides to climb all the way up." He shone the
flashlight on the cave wall, and sure enough, the Baudelaires could
see two rows of small carved holes, perfect for sticking one's feet
and hands into.

"How do you know all this?" Violet asked.

The scout looked at her for a moment, and it seemed to the Baudelaires
that he was smiling behind his mask. "I read it," he said, "in a book
called Remarkable Phenomena of the Mortmain Mountains ."

"That sounds familiar," Klaus said.

"It should," the scout replied. "I borrowed it from Dr. Montgomery's
library."

Dr. Montgomery was one of the Baudelaires' first guardians, and at the
mention of his name Violet and Klaus found they had several more
questions they wanted to ask.

"When--" Violet started.

"Why--" Klaus started.

"Carm--" Another voice startled the Baudelaires and the scout--the
voice of Bruce, waking up halfway at the sound of the conversation.
All three children froze for a moment, as Bruce turned over on his
blanket, and with a long sigh, went back to sleep.

"We'll talk when we reach the headquarters " the scout whispered. "The
Vertical Flame Diversion is very echoey, so we'll have to be
absolutely silent as we climb, or the echoing noise will alert Bruce
and the Snow Scouts. It'll be very dark inside, so you'll have to feel
against the wall for the footholds, and the air will be smoky, but if
you keep your masks on they'll filter the air and make it easier to
breathe. I'll go first and lead the way. Are you ready?"

Violet and Klaus turned toward one another. Even though they could not
see each other's faces through the masks, both siblings knew that they
were not at all ready. Following a complete stranger into a secret
passageway through the center of the mountains, toward a headquarters
they could not even be sure existed, did not seem like a very safe
thing to do. The last time they had agreed to take a risky journey,
their baby sister had been snatched away from them. What would happen
this time, when they were all alone with a mysterious masked figure in
a dark and smoky hole?

"I know it must be hard to trust me, Baudelaires," said the sweatered
scout, "after so many people have done you wrong."

"Can you give us a reason to trust you?" Violet said.

The scout looked down for a moment, and then turned his mask to face
both Baudelaires. "One of you mentioned the word 'xenial,'" he said,
"when you were talking with Bruce about that silly pledge. 'Xenial' is
a word which refers to the giving of gifts to a stranger."

"He's right," Klaus murmured to his sister.

"I know that having a good vocabulary doesn't guarantee that I'm a
good person," the boy said. "But it does mean I've read a great deal.
And in my experience, well-read people are less likely to be evil."

Violet and Klaus looked at one another through their masks. Neither of
them were entirely convinced by what the masked scout had said. There
are, of course, plenty of evil people who have read a great many
books, and plenty of very kind people who seem to have found some
other method of spending their time. But the Baudelaires knew that
there was a kind of truth to the boy's statement, and they had to
admit that they preferred to take their chances with a stranger who
knew what the word "xenial" meant, rather than exiting the cave and
trying to find the headquarters all by themselves. So the siblings
turned back to the scout, nodded their masks, and followed him to the
footholds in the wall, making sure they still had all the items from
the caravan with them. The footholds were surprisingly easy to use,
and in a short time the Baudelaires were following the mysterious
scout into the dark and smoky entrance of the passageway.

The Vertical Flame Diversion that connected the Mortmain Mountain
headquarters to this particular Volunteer Feline Detectives cave was
once one of the most heavily guarded secrets in the world. Anyone who
wanted to use it had to correctly answer a series of questions
concerning the force of gravity, the habits of carnivorous beasts, and
the central themes of Russian novels, so very few people even knew the
passageway's exact whereabouts. Until the two Baudelaires' journey,
the passageway had not been used for many years, ever since one of my
comrades removed the pole in order to use it in the construction of a
submarine. So it would be accurate to say that the Vertical Flame
Diversion was a road less traveled--even less traveled than the path
through the Mortmain Mountains on which this book began.

While the elder Baudelaires had a very good reason to be on the road
less traveled, as they were in a great hurry to reach the headquarters
and rescue their sister from the clutches of Count Olaf, there is no
reason whatsoever why you should be on the road less traveled and
choose to read the rest of this woeful chapter, which describes their
dark and smoky journey.

The ashen air from the Snow Scouts' fire was difficult to breathe,
even through the masks, and Violet and Klaus had to struggle not to
cough, knowing that the coughing sound would echo down the passageway
and wake up Bruce, but there is no reason for you to struggle through
my dismal description of this problem. A number of spiders had noticed
the footholds were not being used lately, and had moved in and
converted them into spider condominiums, but you are under no
obligation to read what happens when spiders are suddenly woken up by
the sudden appearance of a climbing foot in their new homes. And as
the Baudelaires followed the scout farther and farther up, the strong
freezing winds from the top of the mountain would rush through the
passageway, and all three youngsters would cling to the footholds with
their very lives, hoping that the wind would not blow them back down
to the cave floor, but although the Baudelaires found it necessary to
keep climbing through the rest of the dark day so they could reach the
headquarters as quickly as possible, and I find it necessary to finish
describing it, so my account of the Baudelaire case is as accurate and
as complete as possible, it is not necessary for you to finish reading
the rest of this chapter, so you can be as miserable as possible. My
description of the Baudelaires' journey up through the road less
traveled begins on the next page, but I beg you not to travel along
with them. Instead, you may take a page from Bruce's book, and skip
ahead to Chapter Six, and find my report on Sunny Baudelaire's
tribulations--a word which here means "opportunities to eavesdrop
while cooking for a theater troupe"--with Count Olaf, or you may skip
ahead to Chapter Seven, when the elder Baudelaires arrive at the site
of the V.F.D. headquarters and unmask the stranger who led them there,
or you may take the road very frequently traveled and skip away from
this book altogether, and find something better to do with your time
besides finishing this unhappy tale and becoming a weary, weeping, and
well-read person.

The Baudelaires' journey up the Vertical Flame Diversion was so dark
and treacherous that it is not enough to write "The Baudelaires'
journey up the Vertical Flame Diversion was so dark and treacherous
that it is not enough to write 'The Baudelaires' journey up the
Vertical Flame Diversion was so dark and treacherous that it is not
enough to write "The Baudelaires' journey up the Vertical Flame
Diversion was so dark and treacherous that it is not enough to write
'The Baudelaires' journey up the Vertical Flame Diversion was so dark
and treacherous that it is not enough to write "My dear sister, I am
taking a great risk in hiding a letter to you inside one of my books,
but I am certain that even the most melancholy and well-read people in
the world have found my account of the lives of the three Baudelaire
children even more wretched than I had promised, and so this book will
stay on the shelves of libraries, utterly ignored, waiting for you to
open it and find this message. As an additional precaution, I placed a
warning that the rest of this chapter contains a description of the
Baudelaires' miserable journey up the Vertical Flame Diversion, so
anyone who has the courage to read such a description is probably
brave enough to read my letter to you. I have at last learned the
whereabouts of the evidence that will exonerate me, a phrase which
here means "prove to the authorities that it is Count Olaf, and not
me, who has started so many fires." Your suggestion, so many years ago
at that picnic, that a tea set would be a handy place to hide anything
important and small in the event of a dark day, has turned out to be
correct. (Incidentally, your other picnic suggestion, that a simple
combination of sliced mango, black beans, and chopped celery mixed
with black pepper, lime juice, and olive oil would make a delicious
chilled salad also turned out to be correct.)

I am on my way now to the Valley of Four Drafts, in order to continue
my research on the Baudelaire case. I hope also to retrieve the
aforementioned evidence at last. It is too late to restore my
happiness, of course, but at least I can clear my name. From the site
of V.F.D. headquarters, I will head straight for the Hotel Denouement.
I should arrive by--well, it wouldn't be wise to type the date, but it
should be easy for you to remember Beatrice's birthday. Meet me at the
hotel. Try to get us a room without ugly curtains.

With all due respect,

Lemony Snicket

P.S. If you substitute the chopped celery with hearts of palm, it is
equally delicious.


CHAPTER SIX

In the very early hours of the morning, while the two elder
Baudelaires struggled to find their footing as they climbed up the
Vertical Flame Diversion--and I sincerely hope that you did not read
the description of that journey--the youngest Baudelaire found herself
struggling with a different sort of footing altogether. Sunny had not
enjoyed the long, cold night on Mount Fraught. If you have ever slept
in a covered casserole dish on the highest peak of a mountain range,
then you know that it is an uncomfortable place to lay one's head,
even if you find a dishtowel inside it that can serve as a blanket.
All night long, the chilly mountain winds blew through the tiny holes
inside the top of the cover, making it so cold inside the dish that
Sunny's enormous teeth chattered all night, giving her tiny cuts on
her lips and making such a loud noise that it was impossible to sleep.
Finally, when the first rays of the morning sun shone through the
holes and made it warm enough to doze, Count Olaf left his tent and
kicked open the cover of the dish to begin ordering Sunny around.

"Wake up, you dentist's nightmare!" he cried. Sunny opened one
exhausted eye and found herself staring at the villain's footing,
particularly the tattoo on Olaf's left ankle, a sight that was enough
to make her wish her eyes were still closed. Tattooed on Olaf's ankle
was the image of an eye, and it seemed to Sunny that this eye had been
watching the Baudelaires throughout all of their troubles, from the
day on Briny Beach when they learned of the terrible fire that
destroyed their home. Time after time, Count Olaf had tried to hide
this eye so the authorities would not recognize him, so the children
were always uncovering it from behind his ridiculous disguises, and
the Baudelaires had begun seeing the eye in other places, such as at
the office of an evil hypnotist, on the side of a carnival tent, on
Esme' Squalor's purse, and on a necklace owned by a mysterious
fortune-teller. It was almost as if this eye had replaced the eyes of
their parents, but instead of keeping watch over the children and
making sure that they were safe from harm, this eye merely gave them a
blank stare, as if it did not care about the children's troubles, or
could do nothing about them. If you looked very closely, you could
find the letters V.F.D. half-hidden in the eye, and this reminded
Sunny of all the sinister secrets that surrounded the three siblings,
and how far they were from understanding the web of mystery in which
they found themselves. But it is hard to think about mysteries and
secrets first thing in the morning, particularly if someone is yelling
at you, and Sunny turned her attention to what her captor was saying.

"You'll be doing all the cooking and cleaning for us, orphan," Count
Olaf said, "and you can start by making us breakfast. We have a big
day ahead of us, and a good breakfast will give me and my troupe the
energy we need to perform unspeakable crimes."

"Plakna?" Sunny asked, which meant "How am I supposed to cook
breakfast on the top of a freezing mountain?" but Count Olaf just gave
her a nasty smile.

"Too bad your brain isn't as big as your teeth, you little monkey," he
said. "You're talking nonsense, as usual."

Sunny sighed, frustrated that there was no one on top of the Mortmain
Mountains who understood what she was trying to say. "Translo," she
said, which meant "Just because you don't understand something doesn't
mean that it's nonsense."

"There you go, babbling again," Olaf said, and tossed Sunny the car
keys. "Get the groceries out of the trunk of the car and get to work."

Sunny suddenly thought of something that might cheer her up a little
bit. "Sneakitawc," she said, which was her way of saying "Of course,
because you don't understand me, I can say anything I want to you, and
you'll have no idea what I'm talking about."


"I'm getting quite tired of your ridiculous speech impediment," Count
Olaf said.

"Brummel," Sunny said, which meant "In my opinion, you desperately
need a bath, and your clothing is a shambles."

"Be quiet this instant," Olaf ordered.

"Busheney," Sunny said, which meant something along the lines of,
"You're an evil man with no concern whatsoever for other people."

"Shut up!" Count Olaf roared. "Shut up and get cooking!" Sunny got out
of the casserole dish and stood up, looking down at the snowy ground
so the villain would not see she was smiling. It is not nice to tease
people, of course, but the youngest Baudelaire felt that it was all
right to enjoy a joke at the expense of such a murderous and evil man,
and she walked to Olaf's car with a spring in her step, a phrase which
here means "in a surprisingly cheerful manner considering she was in
the clutches of a ruthless villain on top of a mountain so cold that
even the nearby waterfall was frozen solid."

But when Sunny Baudelaire opened the trunk of the car her smile faded.
Under normal circumstances, it is not safe to keep groceries in the
trunk of a car for an extended period of time, because some foods will
spoil without being refrigerated. But Sunny saw that the temperatures
of the Mortmain Mountains had caused the groceries to become
over-refrigerated. A thin layer of frost covered every item, and Sunny
had to crawl inside and wipe the frost off with her bare hands to see
what she might make for the troupe. There was a variety of
well-chilled food that Olaf had stolen from the carnival, but none of
it seemed like the makings of a good breakfast. There was a bag of
coffee beans beneath a harpoon gun and a frozen hunk of spinach, but
there was no way to grind the beans into tiny pieces to make coffee.
Near a picnic basket and a large bag of mushrooms was a jug of orange
juice, but it had been close to one of the bullet holes in the trunk,
and so had frozen completely solid in the cold. And after Sunny moved
aside three chunks of cold cheese, a large can of water chestnuts, and
an eggplant as big as herself, she finally found a small jar of
boysenberry jam, and a loaf of bread she could use to make toast,
although it was so cold it felt more like a log than a breakfast
ingredient.

"Wake up!" Sunny peeked out of the trunk and saw Count Olaf calling
through the door of one of the tents she had assembled. "Wake up and
get dressed for breakfast!"

"Can't we sleep ten minutes more?" asked the whiny voice of the
hook-handed man. "I was having a lovely dream about sneezing without
covering my nose and mouth, and giving everybody germs."

"Absolutely not!" Olaf replied. "I have lots of work for you to do."

"But Olaf," said Esme' Squalor, emerging from the tent she had shared
with Count Olaf. Her hair was in curlers and she was wearing a long
robe and a pair of fuzzy slippers. "I need a little while to choose
what I'm going to wear. It's not in to burn down a headquarters
without wearing a fashionable outfit."

Sunny gasped in the trunk. She had known that Olaf was eager to reach
the V.F.D. headquarters as soon as possible, in order to get his hands
on the rest of some crucial evidence, but it had not occurred to her
that he would combine this evidence-grabbing with his usual pyromania,
a word which here means "a love of fire, usually the product of a
deranged mind."

"I can't imagine why you need all this time," was Count Olaf's grumpy
reply to his girlfriend. "After all, I wear the same outfit for weeks
at a time, except when I'm in disguise, and I look almost unbearably
handsome. Well, I suppose you have a few minutes before breakfast is
ready. Slow service is one of the disadvantages of having infants for
slaves." Olaf strode over to the car and peered in at Sunny, who was
still clutching the loaf of bread.

"Hurry up, bigmouth," he growled at Sunny. "I need a nice hot meal to
take the chill out of the morning."

"Unfeasi!" Sunny cried. By "Unfeasi" she meant "To make a hot meal
without any electricity, I'd need a fire, and expecting a baby to
start a fire all by herself on top of a snowy mountain is cruelly
impossible and impossibly cruel," but Olaf merely frowned. "Your baby
talk is really beginning to annoy me," he said.

"Hygiene," Sunny said, to make herself feel better. She meant
something along the lines of, "Additionally, you ought to be ashamed
of yourself for wearing the same outfit for weeks at a time without
washing," but Olaf merely scowled at her and walked back into his
tent.

Sunny looked at the cold ingredients and tried to think. Even if she
had been old enough to start a fire by herself, Sunny had been nervous
around flames since the fire that had destroyed the Baudelaire
mansion. But as she thought of the fire that destroyed her own home,
she remembered something her mother had told her once. They had both
been busy in the kitchen--Sunny's mother was busy preparing for a
fancy luncheon, and Sunny was busy dropping a fork on the floor over
and over again to see what sort of sound it made. The luncheon was due
to start any minute, and Sunny's mother was quickly mixing up a salad
of sliced mango, black beans, and chopped celery mixed with black
pepper, lime juice, and olive oil.

"This isn't a very complicated recipe, Sunny," her mother had said,
"but if I arrange the salad very nicely on fancy plates, people will
think I've been cooking all day. Often, when cooking, the presentation
of the food can be as important as the food itself."

Thinking of what her mother had said, she opened the picnic basket in
Olaf's trunk and found that it contained a set of elegant plates, each
emblazoned with the familiar eye insignia, and a small tea set. Then
she rolled up her sleeves--an expression which here means "focused
very hard on the task at hand, but did not actually roll up her
sleeves, because it was very cold on the highest peak of the Mortmain
Mountains "--and got to work as Count Olaf and his comrades started
their day.

"I'll use these blankets for a tablecloth," Sunny heard Olaf say in
the tent, over the sound her own teeth were making.

"Good idea," she heard Esme' reply. "It's very in to dine al fresco."

"What does that mean?" Olaf asked.

"It means 'outside,' of course," Esme' explained. "It's fashionable to
eat your meals in the fresh air."

"I knew what it meant," Count Olaf replied. "I was just testing you."

"Hey boss," Hugo called from the next tent. "Colette won't share the
dental floss."

"There's no reason to use dental floss," Count Olaf said, "unless
you're trying to strangle someone with a very weak neck."

"Kevin, would you do me a favor?" the hook-handed man asked, as Sunny
struggled to open the jug of juice. "Will you help me comb my hair?
These hooks can make it difficult sometimes."

"I'm jealous of your hooks," Kevin replied. "Having no hands is better
than having two equally strong hands."

"Don't be ridiculous," one of the white-faced women replied. "Having a
white face is worse than both of your situations."

"But you have a white face because you put makeup on," Colette said,
as Sunny climbed back out of the trunk and knelt down in the snow.
"You're putting powder on your face right now."

"Must you bicker every single morning?" Count Olaf asked, and stomped
back out of his tent carrying a blanket covered in images of eyes.
"Somebody take this blanket and set the table over there on that flat
rock."

Hugo walked out of the tent and smiled at his new boss. "I'd be happy
to," he said.

Esme' stepped outside, having changed into a bright red snowsuit, and
put her arm around Olaf. "Fold the blanket into a large triangle," she
said to Hugo. "That's the in way to do it."

"Yes ma'am," Hugo said, "and, if you don't mind my saying so, that's a
very handsome snowsuit you are wearing."

The villainous girlfriend turned all the way around to show off her
outfit from every angle. Sunny looked up from her cooking and noticed
that the letter B was sewn onto the back of it, along with the eye
insignia. "I'm glad you like it, Hugo," Esme' said. "It's stolen."

Count Olaf glanced at Sunny and quickly stepped in front of his
girlfriend. "What are you staring at, toothy?" he asked. "Are you done
making breakfast?"

"Almost," Sunny replied.

"That infant never makes any sense," Hugo said. "No wonder she fooled
us into thinkine she was a carnival freak."

Sunny sighed, but no one heard her over the scornful laughter of
Olaf's troupe. One by one, the villain's wretched employees emerged
from the tent and strolled over to the flat rock where Hugo was laying
out the blanket. One of the white-faced women glanced at Sunny and
gave her a small smile, but nobody offered to help her finish with the
breakfast preparations, or even to set the table with the
eye-patterned dishes. Instead, they gathered around the rock talking
and laughing until Sunny carefully carried the breakfast over to them,
arranged on a large eye-shaped tray that she'd found in the bottom of
the picnic basket. Although she was still frightened to be in Olaf's
clutches and worried about her siblings, Sunny could not help but be a
little proud as Count Olaf and his comrades looked at the meal she had
prepared.

Sunny had kept in mind what her mother had said about presentation
being as important as the food itself, and managed to put together a
lovely breakfast despite the difficult circumstances. First, she had
opened the jug of frozen orange juice and used a small spoon to chip
away at the ice until she had a large heap of juice shavings, which
she arranged into tiny piles on each plate to make orange granita, a
cold and delicious concoction that is often served at fancy dinner
parties and masked balls. Then, Sunny had rinsed her mouth out with
melted snow so it would be as clean as possible, and chopped some of
the coffee beans with her teeth. She placed a bit of the ground coffee
inside each cup and combined it with more snow she had melted in her
own hands to make iced coffee, a delicious beverage I first enjoyed
when visiting Thailand to interview a taxi driver. Meanwhile, the
youngest Baudelaire had put the chilled bread underneath her shirt to
warm it up, and when it was warm enough to eat she put one slice on
each plate, and using a small spoon, spread some boysenberry jam on
each piece of bread. She did her best to spread the jam in the shape
of an eye, to please the villains who would be eating it, and as a
finishing touch she found a bouquet of ivy, which Count Olaf had given
his girlfriend not so long ago, and placed it in the small pitcher of
the tea set used for cream. There was no cream, but the ivy would help
the presentation of the food by serving as a centerpiece, a word which
here means "a decoration placed in the middle of a table, often used
to distract people from the food." Of course, orange granita and iced
coffee are not often served at al fresco breakfasts on cold mountain
peaks, and bread with jam is more traditionally prepared as toast, but
without a source of heat or any other cooking equipment, Sunny had
done the best she could, and she hoped that Olaf and his troupe might
appreciate her efforts.

"Caffefredde, sorbet, toast tartar," she announced.

"What is this?" Count Olaf said suspiciously, peering into his coffee
cup. "It looks like coffee, but it's freezing cold!"

"And what is this orange stuff?" Esme' asked suspiciously. "I want
fashionable, in food, not a handful of ice!"

Colette picked up a piece of the bread and stared at it suspiciously.
"This toast feels raw," she said. "Is it safe to eat raw toast?"

"Of course not," Hugo said. "I bet that baby is trying to poison us."

"Actually, the coffee isn't bad," one of the white-faced women said,
"even if it is a little bitter. Could someone pass the sugar, please?"

'Sugar?" shrieked Count Olaf, erupting in anger. He stood up, grabbed
one end of the blanket, and pulled as hard as he could, scattering all
of Sunny's hard work. Food, beverages, and dishes fell everywhere, and
Sunny had to duck to avoid getting hit on the head with a flying fork.
"All the sugar in the world couldn't save this terrible breakfast!" he
roared, and then leaned down so that his shiny, shiny eyes stared
right into Sunny's. "I told you to make a nice, hot breakfast, and you
gave me cold, disgusting nonsense!" he said, his smelly breath making
a cloud in the chilly air. "Don't you see how high up we are, you
sabertoothed papoose? If I threw you off Mount Fraught, you'd never
survive!"

"Olaf!" Esme' said. "I'm surprised at you! Surely you remember that
we'll never get the Baudelaire fortune if we toss Sunny off the
mountain. We have to keep Sunny alive for the greater good."

"Yes, yes," Count Olaf said. "I remember. I'm not going to throw the
orphan off the mountain. I just wanted to terrify her." He gave Sunny
a cruel smirk, and then turned to the hook-handed man. "Walk over to
that frozen waterfall," he said, "and crack a hole in the ice with
your hook. The stream is full of Stricken Salmon. Catch enough for all
of us, and we'll have the baby prepare us a proper meal."

"Good idea, Olaf," the hook-handed man said, standing up and walking
toward the icy slope. "You're as smart as you are intelligent."

"Sakesushi," Sunny said quietly, which meant "I don't think you'll
enjoy salmon if it's not cooked."

"Stop your baby talk and wash these dishes," Olaf ordered. "They're
covered in lousy food."

"You know, Olaf," said the white-faced woman who had asked for sugar,
"it's none of my business, but we might put someone else in charge of
cooking. It was probably difficult for a baby to prepare a hot
breakfast without a fire."

"But there is a fire," said a deep, low voice, and everyone turned
around to see who had arrived.

Having an aura of menace is like having a pet weasel, because you
rarely meet someone who has one, and when you do it makes you want to
hide under the coffee table. An aura of menace is simply a distinct
feeling of evil that accompanies the arrival of certain people, and
very few individuals are evil enough to produce an aura of menace that
is very strong. Count Olaf, for example, had an aura of menace that
the three Baudelaires had felt the moment they met him, but a number
of other people never seemed to sense that a villain was in their
midst, even when Olaf was standing right next to them with an evil
gleam in his eye. But when two visitors arrived at the highest peak of
the Mortmain Mountains, their aura of menace was unmistakable. Sunny
gasped when she saw them. Esme' Squalor shuddered in her snowsuit. The
members of Olaf's troupe--all except the hook-handed man, who was busy
fishing for salmon and so was lucky enough to miss the visitors'
arrival--gazed down at the snowy ground rather than take a further
look at them. Count Olaf himself looked a bit nervous as the man, the
woman, and their aura of menace drew closer and closer. And even I,
after all this time, can feel their aura of menace so strongly, just
by writing about these two people, that I dare not say their names,
and will instead refer to them the way everyone who dares refer to
them refers to them, as "the man with a beard, but no hair" and "the
woman with hair, but no beard."

"It's good to see you, Olaf," continued the deep voice, and Sunny
realized that the voice belonged to the sinister-looking woman. She
was dressed in a suit made of a strange blue fabric that was very
shiny, decorated with two large pads, one on each shoulder. She was
dragging a wooden toboggan--a word which here means "a sled big enough
to hold several people," which made an eerie scraping sound against
the cold ground. "I was worried that the authorities might have
captured you."

"You look well," said the man with a beard but no hair. He was dressed
identically to the woman with hair but no beard, but his voice was
very hoarse, as if he had been screaming for hours and could hardly
talk. "It's been a long time since we've laid eyes on one another."
The man gave Olaf a grin that made it seem even colder on the mountain
peak, and then stopped and helped the woman lean the toboggan against
the rock where Sunny had served breakfast. The youngest Baudelaire saw
that the toboggan was painted with the familiar eye insignia, and had
a few long leather straps, presumably used for steering.

Count Olaf coughed lightly into his hand, which is something people
often do when they cannot think of what to say. "Hello," he said, a
bit nervously. "Did I hear you say something about a fire?"

The man with a beard but no hair and the woman with hair but no beard
looked at one another and shared a laugh that made Sunny cover her
ears with her hands. "Haven't you noticed," the woman said, "that
there are no snow gnats around?"

"We had noticed that," Esme' said. "I thought maybe snow gnats were no
longer in."

"Don't be ridiculous, Esme'," said the man with a beard but no hair.
He reached out and kissed Esme''s hand, which Sunny could see was
trembling. "The gnats aren't around because they can smell the smoke."

"I don't smell anything," said Hugo.

"Well, if you were a tiny insect, you'd smell something," replied the
woman with hair but no beard. "If you were a snow gnat, you'd smell
the smoke from the V.F.D. headquarters."

"We did you a favor, Olaf," the man said. "We burned the entire place
down."

"No!" Sunny cried, before she could stop herself. By "No!" she meant
"I certainly hope that isn't true, because my siblings and I hoped to
reach V.F.D. headquarters, solve the mysteries that surround us, and
perhaps find one of our parents," but she had not planned to say it
out loud. The two visitors looked down at the youngest Baudelaire,
casting their aura of menace in her direction.

"What is that?" asked the man with a beard but no hair.

"That's the youngest Baudelaire," replied Esme'. "We've eliminated the
other two, but we're keeping this one around to do our bidding until
we can finally steal the fortune."

The woman with hair but no beard nodded. "Infant servants are so
troublesome," she said. "I had an infant servant once--a long time
ago, before the schism."

"Before the schism?" Olaf said, and Sunny wished Klaus were with her,
because the baby did not know what the word "schism" meant. "That is a
long time ago. That infant must be all grown up by now."

"Not necessarily," the woman said, and laughed again, while her
companion leaned down to gaze at Sunny. Sunny could not bear to look
into the eyes of the man with a beard but no hair, and instead looked
down at his shiny shoes.

"So this is Sunny Baudelaire," he said in his strange, hoarse voice.
"Well, well, well. I've heard so much about this little orphan. She's
caused almost as many problems as her parents did." He stood up again
and looked around at Olaf and his troupe. "But we know how to solve
problems, don't we? Fire can solve any problem in the world."

He began to laugh, and the woman with hair but no beard laughed along
with him. Nervously, Count Olaf began to laugh, too, and then glared
at his troupe until they laughed along with him, and Sunny found
herself surrounded by tall, laughing villains. "Oh, it was wonderful,"
said the woman with hair but no beard. "First we burned down the
kitchen. Then we burned down the dining room. Then we burned down the
parlor, and then the disguise center, the movie room, and the stables.
Then we moved on to the gymnasium and the training center, and the
garage and all six of the laboratories. We burned down the dormitories
and schoolrooms, the lounge, the theater, and the music room, as well
as the museum and the ice cream shop. Then we burned down the
rehearsal studios and the testing centers and the swimming pool, which
was very hard to burn down. Then we burned down all the bathrooms, and
then finally, we burned down the V.F.D. library last night. That was
my favorite part--books and books and books, all turned to ashes so no
one could read them. You should have been there, Olaf! Every morning
we lit fires and every evening we celebrated with a bottle of wine and
some finger puppets. We've been wearing these fireproof suits for
almost a month. It's been a marvelous time."

"Why did you burn it down gradually?" Count Olaf asked. "Whenever I
burn something down, I do it all at once."

"We couldn't have burned down the entire headquarters at once," said
the man with a beard but no hair. "Someone would have spotted us.
Remember, where there's smoke there's fire."

"But if you burned the headquarters down room by room," Esme' said,
"didn't all of the volunteers escape?"

"They were gone already," said the man, and scratched his head where
his hair might have been. "The entire headquarters were deserted. It
was as if they knew we were coming. Oh well, you can't win them all."

"Maybe we'll find some of them when we burn down the carnival," said
the woman, in her deep, deep voice.

"Carnival?" Olaf asked nervously.

"Yes," the woman said, and scratched the place where her beard would
have been, if she had one. "There's an important piece of evidence
that V.F.D. has hidden in a figurine sold at Caligari Carnival, so we
need to go burn it down."

"I burned it down already," Count Olaf said.

"The whole place?" the woman said in surprise.

"The whole place," Olaf said, giving her a nervous smile.

"Congratulations," she said, in a deep purr. "You're better than I
thought, Olaf."

Count Olaf looked relieved, as if he had not been sure whether the
woman was going to compliment him or kick him. "Well, it's all for the
greater good," he said.

"As a reward," the woman said, "I have a gift for you, Olaf." Sunny
watched as the woman reached into the pocket of her shiny suit and
drew out a stack of paper, tied together with thick rope. The paper
looked very old and worn, as if it had been passed around to a variety
of different people, hidden in a number of secret compartments, and
perhaps even divided into different piles, driven around a city in
horse-drawn carriages, and then put back together at midnight in the
back room of a bookstore disguised as a cafe disguised as a sporting
goods store. Count Olaf's eyes grew very wide and very shiny, and he
reached his filthy hands toward it if it were the Baudelaire fortune
itself.

"The Snicket file!" he said, in a hushed whisper.

"It's all here," the woman said. "Every chart, every map and every
photograph from the only file that could put us all in jail."

"It's complete except for page thirteen, of course," the man said. "We
understand that the Baudelaires managed to steal that page from
Heimlich Hospital."

The two visitors glared down at Sunny Baudelaire, who couldn't help
whimpering in fear. "Surchmi," she said. She meant something along the
lines of, "I don't have it--my siblings do," but she did not need a
translator.

"The older orphans have it," Olaf said, "but I'm fairly certain
they're dead."

"Then all of our problems have gone up in smoke," said the woman with
hair but no beard.

Count Olaf grabbed the file and held it to his chest as if it were a
newborn baby, although he was not the sort of person to treat a
newborn baby very kindly. "This is the most wonderful gift in the
world," he said. "I'm going to go read it right now."

"We'll all read it together," said the woman with hair but no beard.
"It contains secrets we all ought to know."

"But first," said the man with a beard but no hair, "I have a gift for
your girlfriend, Olaf."

"For me?" Esme' asked.

"I found these in one of the rooms of headquarters," the man said.
"I've never seen one before, but it has been quite some time since I
was a volunteer." With a sly smile, he reached into his pocket and
took out a small green tube.

"What's that?" Esme' asked.

"I think it's a cigarette," the man said.

"A cigarette!" Esme' said, with a smile as big as Olaf's. "How in!"

"I thought you'd enjoy them," the man said. "Here, try it. I happen to
have quite a few matches right here."

The man with a beard but no hair struck a match, lit the end of the
green tube, and offered it to the wicked girlfriend, who grabbed it
and held it to her mouth. A bitter smell, like that of burning
vegetables, filled the air, and Esme' Squalor began to cough.

"What's the matter?" asked the woman in her deep voice. "I thought you
liked things that are in."

"I do," Esme' said, and then coughed quite a bit more. Sunny was
reminded of Mr. Poe, who was always coughing into a handkerchief, as
Esme' coughed and coughed and finally dropped the green tube to the
ground where it spewed out a dark green smoke. "I love cigarettes,"
she explained to the man with a beard but no hair, "but I prefer to
smoke them with a long holder because I don't like the smell or taste
and because they're very bad for you."

"Never mind that now," Count Olaf said impatiently. "Let's go into my
tent and read the file." He started to walk toward the tent but
stopped and glared at his comrades, who were beginning to follow him.
"The rest of you stay out here," he said. "There are secrets in this
file that I do not want you to know."

The two sinister visitors began to laugh, and followed Count Olaf and
Esme' into the tent closing the flap behind them. Sunny stood with
Hugo, Colette, Kevin, and the two white-faced women and stared after
them in silence, waiting for the aura of menace to disappear.

"Who were those people?" asked the hook-handed man, and everyone
turned to see that he had returned from his fishing expedition. Four
salmon hung from each of his hooks, dripping with the waters of the
Stricken Stream.

"I don't know," said one of the white-faced women, "but they made me
very nervous."

"If they're friends of Count Olaf's," Kevin said, "how bad could they
be?"

The members of the troupe looked at one another, but no one answered
the ambidextrous person's question. "What did that man mean when he
said 'Where there's smoke there's fire'?" Hugo asked.

"I don't know," Colette said. A chilly wind blew, and Sunny watched
her contort her body in the breeze until it looked almost as curvy as
the smoke from the green tube Esme' had dropped.

"Forget those questions," the hook-handed man said. "My question is,
how are you going to prepare this salmon, orphan?"

Olaf's henchman was looking down at Sunny, but the youngest Baudelaire
did not answer for a moment. Sunny was thinking, and her siblings
would have been proud of her for the way she was thinking. Klaus would
have been proud, because she was thinking about the phrase "Where
there's smoke there's fire," and what it might mean. And Violet would
have been proud, because she was thinking about the salmon that the
hook-handed man was holding, and what she might invent that would help
her. Sunny stared at the hook-handed man and thought as hard as she
could, and she felt almost as if both siblings were with her, Klaus
helping her think about a phrase and Violet helping her think about an
invention.

"Answer me, baby," the hook-handed man growled. "What are you going to
make for us out of this salmon?"

"Lox!" Sunny said, but it was as if all three of the Baudelaires had
answered the question.


CHAPTER SEVEN

An associate of mine once wrote a novel called Corridors of Power,
which told the story of various people discussing how the world has
become a corrupt and dangerous place and whether or not there are
enough people with the integrity and decency necessary to keep the
entire planet from descending into despair. I have not read this novel
in several years, because I participate in enough discussions on how
the world has become a corrupt and dangerous place and whether or not
there are enough people with the integrity and decency necessary to
keep the entire planet from descending into despair. I have not read
this novel in several years, because I participate in enough
discussions on how the world has become a corrupt and dangerous place
and whether or not there are enough people with the integrity and
decency necessary to keep the entire planet from descending into
despair without reading about it in my leisure time, but nevertheless
the phrase "corridors of power" has come to mean the hushed and often
secret places where important matters are discussed. Whether or not
they are actual corridors, the corridors of power tend to feel quiet
and mysterious. If you have ever walked inside an important building,
such as the main branch of a library or the office of a dentist who
has agreed to disguise your teeth, then you may have experienced this
feeling that accompanies the corridors of power, and Violet and Klaus
Baudelaire experienced it as they reached the end of the Vertical
Flame Diversion, and followed the mysterious sweatered scout as he
climbed out of the secret passageway. Even through their masks, the
two siblings could sense that they were in an important place, even
though it was nothing more than a dim, curved hallway with a small
grate on the ceiling where the morning light was shining through.

"That's where the smoke escapes from the Snow Scouts' fire," whispered
the mysterious scout, pointing up at the ceiling. "That leads to the
very center of the Valley of Four Drafts, so the smoke is scattered to
the four winds. V.F.D. doesn't want anyone to see the smoke."

"Where there's smoke," Violet said, "there's fire."

"Exactly," the scout said. "Anyone who saw smoke coming from this high
up in the mountains might become suspicious and investigate. In fact,
I found a device that works exactly according to this principle." He
reached into his backpack and drew out a small rectangular box filled
with small green tubes, exactly like the one that Sunny had seen the
man with a beard but no hair give to Esme' Squalor.

"No thank you," Violet said. "I don't smoke."

"I don't, either," the scout said, "but these aren't cigarettes. These
are Verdant Flammable Devices. Verdant means 'green,' so when you
light one, it gives out a dark green smoke, so another volunteer will
know where you are."

Klaus took the box from the scout and squinted at it in the dim light.
"I've seen a box like this before," he said, "in my father's desk,
when I was looking for a letter opener. I remember thinking it was
strange to find them, because he didn't smoke."

"He must have been hiding them," Violet said. "Why was he keeping them
a secret?"

"The entire organization is a secret," the scout said. "It was very
difficult for me to learn the secret location of the headquarters."

"It was difficult for us, too," Klaus said. "We found it in a coded
map."

"I had to draw my own map," the scout said, and reached into a pocket
in his sweater. He turned on the flashlight, and the two Baudelaires
could see he was holding a notebook with a dark purple cover.

"What's that?" Violet asked.

"It's a commonplace book," the scout said. "Whenever I find something
that seems important or interesting, I write it down. That way, all my
important information is in one place."

"I should start one," Klaus said. "My pockets are bulging with scraps
of paper."

"From information I read in Dr. Montgomery's book, and a few others,"
the scout said, "I managed to draw a map of where to go from here." He
opened the purple notebook and flipped a few pages until he reached a
small but elegant rendering of the cave, the Vertical Flame Diversion,
and the hallway in which they were standing now. "As you can see," he
said, running his finger along the hallway, "the passageway branches
off in two directions."

"This is a very well-drawn map," Violet said.

"Thank you," the scout replied. "I've been interested in cartography
for quite some time. See, if we go to the left, there's a small area
used for sled and snowsuit storage, at least according to a newspaper
article I found. But if we go right, we'll arrive at the Vernacularly
Fastened Door, which should open onto the headquarters' kitchen. We
might walk in on the entire organization having breakfast."

The two Baudelaires looked at one another through their masks, and
Violet put a hand on her brother's shoulder. They did not dare to say
out loud their hope that one of their parents might be just around the
corner.

"Let's go," Violet whispered.

The scout nodded silently in agreement, and led the Baudelaires down
the hallway, which seemed to get colder and colder with every step. By
now they were so far from Bruce and the Snow Scouts that there was no
need to whisper, but all three children kept quiet as they walked down
the dim, curved hallway, hushed by the feeling of the corridors of
power. At last they reached a large metal door with a strange device
where the doorknob should have been. The device looked a bit like a
spider, with curly wires spreading out in all directions, but where
the head of the spider might have been as the keyboard of a
typewriter. Even in her excitement to see the headquarters, Violet's
inventing mind was interested in such a device, and she leaned closer
to see what it was.

"Wait," the sweatered scout said, reaching his arm out to stop her.
"This is a coded lock. If we don't operate it properly, we won't be
able to get into the headquarters."

"How does it work?" Violet said, shivering slightly in the cold.

"I'm not sure," the scout admitted, and took out his commonplace book
again. "It's called the Vernacularly Fastened Door, so--"

"So it operates on language," Klaus finished. "Vernacular is a word
for 'a local language or dialect.'"

"Of course," Violet said. "See how the wires are curled around the
hinges of the door? They're locked in place, unless you type in the
right sequence of letters on that keyboard. There are more letters
than numbers, so it would be more difficult for someone to guess the
combination of the lock."

"That's what I read," the scout confirmed looking at a page in his
notebook. "You're supposed to type in three specific phrases in a row.
The phrases change every season, so volunteers need to have a lot of
information at their fingertips to use this door. The first is the
name of the scientist most widely credited with the discovery of
gravity."

"That's easy," Violet said, and typed in S-I-R-I-S-A-A-C-N-E-W-T-O-N,
the name of a physicist she had always admired. When she was finished,
there was a muted clicking sound from the typewriter keyboard, as if
the device was warming up.

"The second is the Latin name for the Volunteer Feline Detectives,"
the scout said. "I found the answer in Remarkable Phenomena of the
Mortmain Mountains. It's Panthera leo." He leaned forward and typed in
P-A-N-T-H-E-R-A-L-E-O. There was a very quiet buzzing and and the
children saw that the wires near the hinges were shaking very
slightly.

"It's beginning to unlock," Violet said. "I hope I get a chance to
study this invention."

"Let's get to the headquarters first," Klaus said. "What's the third
phrase?"

The scout sighed, and turned a page in the commonplace book. "I'm not
sure," he admitted. "Another volunteer told me that it's the central
theme of Leo Tolstoy's novel Anna Karenina, but I haven't had a chance
to read it yet."

Violet knew that her brother was smiling, even though she could not
see his face through the mask. She was remembering one summer, very
long ago, when Klaus was very young and Sunny was not even conceived.
Every summer, the Baudelaires' mother would read a very long book,
joking that lifting a large novel was the only exercise she liked to
get during the hot months. During the time Violet was thinking of,
Mrs. Baudelaire chose Anna Karenina for her summer reading, and Klaus
would sit on his mother's lap for hours at a time while she read The
middle Baudelaire had not been reading very long, but their mother
helped him with the big words and would occasionally stop reading to
explain what had happened in the story, and in this way Klaus and his
mother read the story of Ms. Karenina, whose boyfriend treats her so
poorly that she throws herself under a train. Violet had spent most of
that summer studying the laws of thermodynamics and building a
miniature helicopter out of an eggbeater and some old copper wiring,
but she knew that Klaus must remember the central theme of the book he
read on his mother's lap.

"The central theme of Anna Karenina" he said, "is that a rural life of
moral simplicity, despite its monotony, is the preferable personal
narrative to a daring life of impulsive passion, which only leads to
tragedy."

"That's a very long theme," the scout said.

"It's a very long book," Klaus replied. "But I can work quickly. My
sisters and I once tapped out a long telegram in no time at all."

"Too bad that telegram never arrived," the scout said quietly, but the
middle Baudelaire was already pressing the keys on the Vernacularly
Fastened Door. As Klaus typed the words "a rural life," a phrase which
here means "living in the country," the wires began to curl and uncurl
very quickly, like worms on a sidewalk after it has rained, and by the
time Klaus was typing "the preferable personal narrative," a phrase
which here means "the way to live your life," the entire door was
quivering as if it were as nervous as the Baudelaires. Finally, Klaus
typed "T-R-A-G-E-D-Y," and the three children stepped back, but
instead of opening, the door stopped shaking and the wires stopped
moving, and the passageway was dead quiet.

"It's not opening," Violet said. "Maybe that isn't the central theme
of Leo Tolstoy's Anna Karenina"

"It seemed like it was working until the last word," the scout said.

"Maybe the mechanism is a little stuck " Violet said.

"Or maybe a daring life of impulsive passion only leads to something
else," the scout said, and in some cases this mysterious person was
right. A daring life of impulsive passion is an expression which
refers to people who follow what is in their hearts, and like people
who prefer to follow their head, or follow the advice of other people,
or follow a mysterious man in a dark blue raincoat, people who lead a
daring life of impulsive passion end up doing all sorts of things. For
instance, if you ever find yourself reading a book entitled The Bible,
you would find the story of Adam and Eve, whose daring life of
impulsive passion led to them putting on clothing for the first time
in their lives, in order to leave the snake-infested garden where they
had been living. Bonnie and Clyde, another famous couple who lived a
daring life of impulsive passion, found that it led them to a
successful if short career in bank robbery. And in my own case, in the
few moments where I have led a daring life of impulsive passion, it
has led to all sorts of trouble, from false accusations of arson to a
broken cufflink I can never have repaired. But in this case, as the
Baudelaires stood at the Vernacularly Fastened Door, hoping to reach
the V.F.D. headquarters, rescue their sister, and see if one of their
parents was indeed alive, it was not the sweatered scout but the two
Baudelaires who were right, because in Leo Tolstoy's Anna Karenina, a
daring life of impulsive passion leads only to tragedy, as Klaus said,
and as Violet said, the mechanism was a little stuck, and after a few
seconds, the door swung open with a slow and eerie creak. The children
stepped through the door, blinking in the sudden light, and stood
frozen in their steps. If you have read this far in the Baudelaires'
woeful story, then you will not be surprised to learn that the V.F.D.
headquarters in the Valley of Four Drafts in the Mortmain Mountains
was no more, but Violet and Klaus, of course, were not reading their
own story. They were in their own story, and this was the part of
their story where they were sick with shock at what they saw.

The Vernacularly Fastened Door did not open onto a kitchen, not
anymore. When the Baudelaires followed the mysterious scout through
the doorway, they found themselves standing in what at first seemed to
be a large field, growing a black and ruined harvest in a valley as
cold and drafty as its name. But slowly, they saw the charred remains
of the grand and impressive building that had stood where the three
children were standing. Nearby was a handful of silverware that had
survived the blaze, scattered in front of the remnants of a stove, and
a refrigerator stood to one side, as if it were guarding the ashen
remains of the rest of the kitchen. To one side was a pile of burnt
wood that had probably once been a large dining table, with a
half-melted candelabra sticking out of the top like a baby tree.
Farther away, they could see the mysterious shapes of other objects
that had survived the fire--a trombone, the pendulum of a grandfather
clock, what looked like a periscope, or perhaps a spyglass, an ice
cream scoop, lying forlornly in a pile of ashes encrusted with burnt
sugar, and an iron archway emblazoned with the words "V.F.D. Library,"
but there was nothing beyond the archway but piles and piles of
blackened remains. It was a devastating sight, and it made Violet and
Klaus feel as if they were all alone in a world that had been
completely ruined. The only thing they could see that seemed untouched
by the fire was a sheer, white wall, beyond the refrigerator, that
rose up as far as two siblings could see. It took the Baudelaires a
few moments to realize that it was a frozen waterfall, rising up in a
slippery slope toward the source of the Stricken Stream on Mount
Fraught, so shiny and white that it made the ruined headquarters look
even darker.

"It must have been beautiful," the sweatered scout said, in a
quivering voice. He walked toward the waterfall, his feet churning up
black dust with every step. "I read that there was a large window," he
said, moving his gloved hand in the air as if it were still there.
"When it was your turn to cook, you could look out at the waterfall
while you were chopping vegetables or simmering a sauce. It was
supposed to be very peaceful. And there was a mechanism just outside
the window that turned some of the water from the pool into steam. The
steam rose up and covered the headquarters, so it couldn't be seen
through the blanket of mist."

The Baudelaires walked to where the scout was standing, and looked
into the frozen pool at the bottom of the waterfall. The pool branched
off into two tributaries, a word which here means "divisions of a
river or stream, each twisting off in a different direction past the
ruins of the headquarters, and curving around the Mortmain Mountains
until they disappeared from view." Violet and Klaus gazed sadly at the
icy swirls of black and gray they had noticed when they were walking
alongside the Stricken Stream.

"It was ashes" Klaus said quietly. "Ashes from the fire fell into the
pool at the bottom of the waterfall, and the stream carried them down
the river."

Violet found that it was easier to discuss a small, specific matter
than think about her immense disappointment.

"But the pool is frozen solid," she said. "The stream couldn't have
carried the ashes anywhere."

"It wouldn't have been frozen when it happened," Klaus replied. "The
heat from the fire would have thawed the pool."

"It must have been awful to see," the sweatered scout said. Violet and
Klaus stood with him, imagining the inferno, a word which here means
"enormous fire that destroyed a secret headquarters high in the
mountains." They could almost hear the shattering of glass as the
windows fell away, and the crackle of the fire as it consumed
everything it could. They could almost smell the thick smoke as it
floated upward and blackened the sky, and they could almost see the
books in the library, falling from the burning shelves and tumbling
into ashes The only thing they could not picture was who might have
been at the headquarters when the fire began, running out into the
freezing cold to avoid the flames.

"Do you think," Violet said, "any of the volunteers. .."

"There's no sign that anyone was here," the scout said quickly.

"But how can we know for sure?" Klaus asked. "There could be a
survivor someplace right now."

"Hello?" Violet called, looking around her at the rubble. "Hello?" She
found that her eyes were filling with tears, as she called out for the
people she knew in her heart were nowhere nearby. The eldest
Baudelaire felt as if she had been calling for these people since that
terrible day on the beach, and that if she called them enough they
might appear before her. She thought of all the times she had called
them, back when she lived with her siblings in the Baudelaire mansion.
Sometimes she called them when she wanted them to see something she
had invented. Sometimes she called them when she wanted them to know
she had arrived home. And sometimes she called them just because she
wanted to know where they were. Sometimes Violet just wanted to see
them, and feel that she was safe as long as they were around.
"Mother!" Violet Baudelaire called. "Father!"

There was no answer.

"Mom!" Klaus called. "Dad!"

The Baudelaires heard nothing but the rush of all four of the valley's
drafts, and a long creak as the Vernacularly Fastened Door blew shut.
They saw that the door had been made to look just like the side of the
mountain, so that they could scarcely see where they had come from, or
the way to get back. Now they were truly alone.

"I know we were all hoping to find people at the headquarters," the
sweatered scout said gently, "but I don't think anyone is here. I
think we're all by ourselves."

"That's impossible!" Klaus cried, and Violet could hear that he was
crying. He reached through his layers of clothing until he found his
pocket, and pulled out page thirteen from the Snicket file, which he
had been carrying with him since the Baudelaires had found it at
Heimlich Hospital. The page had a photograph of their parents,
standing with Jacques Snicket and another man the Baudelaires had been
unable to identify, and above the photograph was a sentence Klaus had
memorized from reading it so many times.

'"Because of the evidence discussed on page nine,'" he recited
tearfully, "'experts now suspect that there may in fact be one
survivor of the fire, but the survivor's whereabouts are unknown.'" He
walked up to the scout and shook the page in his face. "We thought the
survivor would be here," he said.

"I think the survivor is here," the scout said quietly, and removed
his mask to reveal his face at last. "I'm Quigley Quagmire," he said,
"I survived the fire that destroyed my home, and I was hoping to find
my brother and sister."


CHAPTER EIGHT

It is one of the peculiar truths of life that people often say things
that they know full well are ridiculous. If someone asks you how you
are, for example, you might automatically say "Fine, thank you," when
in fact you have just failed an examination or been trampled by an ox.
A friend might tell you, "I've looked everywhere in the world for my
keys," when you know that they have actually only looked in a few
places in the immediate area. Once I said to a woman I loved very
much, "I'm sure that this trouble will end soon, and you and I will
spend the rest of our lives together in happiness and bliss," when I
actually suspected that things were about to get much worse. And so it
was with the two elder Baudelaires, when they stood face-to-face with
Quigley Quagmire and found themselves to be saying things they knew
were absurd.

"You're dead," Violet said, and took off her mask to make sure she was
seeing things clearly. But there was no mistaking Quigley, even though
the Baudelaires had never seen him before. He looked so much like
Duncan and Isadora that he could only be the third Quagmire triplet.

"You perished in a fire along with your parents," Klaus said, but as
he took off his mask he knew this wasn't so. Quigley was even giving
the two Baudelaires a small smile that looked exactly like his
siblings'.

"No," Quigley said. "I survived, and I've been looking for my siblings
ever since."

"But how did you survive?" Violet asked. "Duncan and Isadora said that
the house burned to the ground."

"It did," Quigley said sadly. He looked out at the frozen waterfall
and sighed deeply. "I suppose I should start at the beginning. I was
in my family's library, studying a map of the Finite Forest, when I
heard a shattering of glass, and people shouting. My mother ran into
the room and said there was a fire. We tried to go out the front door
but the main hall was filled with smoke, so she took me back into the
library and lifted a corner of the rug. There was a secret door
underneath. She told me to wait down below while she fetched my
siblings, and she left me there in the dark. I remember hearing the
house falling to pieces above me, and the sound of frantic footsteps,
and my siblings screaming." Quigley put his mask down on the ground
and looked at the two Baudelaires. "But she never came back," he said.
"Nobody came back, and when I tried to open the door, something had
fallen on top of it and it wouldn't budge."

"How did you get out?" Klaus asked.

"I walked," Quigley said. "When it became clear that no one was going
to rescue me, I felt around in the dark and realized I was in a sort
of passageway. There was nowhere else to go so I started walking. I've
never been so frightened in my life, walking alone in some dark
passageway my parents had kept secret. I couldn't imagine where it
would lead."

The two Baudelaires looked at one another. They were thinking about
the secret passageway they had discovered underneath their home, which
they had discovered when they were under the care of Esme' Squalor and
her husband.

"And where did it lead?" Violet said.

"To the house of a herpetologist," Quigley said. "At the end of the
passageway was a secret door that opened into an enormous room, made
entirely of glass. The room was filled with empty cages, but it was
clear that the room had once housed an enormous collection of
reptiles."

"We've been there!" Klaus cried in amazement. "That's Uncle Monty's
house! He was our guardian until Count Olaf arrived, disguised as--"

"As a lab assistant," Quigley finished. "I know. His suitcase was
still there."

"There was a secret passageway under our house, too," Violet said,
"but we didn't discover it until we lived with Esme' Squalor."

"There are secrets everywhere," Quigley said. "I think everyone's
parents have secrets. You just have to know where to look for them."

"But why would our parents, and yours, have tunnels underneath their
homes leading to a fancy apartment building and a herpetologist's
home?" Klaus said. "It doesn't make any sense."

Quigley sighed, and put his backpack on the ashen ground, next to his
mask. "There's a lot that doesn't make sense," he said. "I was hoping
to find the answers here, but now I don't know if I'll ever find
them." He took out his purple notebook and opened it to the first
page. "All I can tell you is what I have here in this commonplace
book."

Klaus gave Quigley a small smile, and reached into his pockets to
retrieve all of the papers he had stored there. "You tell us what you
know," he said, "and we'll tell you what we know. Perhaps together we
can answer our own questions."

Quigley nodded in agreement, and the three children sat in a circle on
what was once the kitchen floor. Quigley opened his backpack and took
out a bag of salted almonds, which he passed around. "You must be
hungry from the climb up the Vertical Flame Diversion," he said. "I
know I am. Let's see, where was I?"

"In the Reptile Room," Violet said, "at the end of the passageway."

"Well, nothing happened for a while," Quigley said. "On the doorstep
of the house was a copy of The Daily Punctilio, which had an article
about the fire. That's how I learned that my parents were dead. I
spent days and days there, all by myself. I was so sad, and so scared,
and I didn't know what else to do. I suppose I was waiting for the
herpetologist to show up for work, and see if he was a friend of my
parents and might be of some assistance. The kitchen was filled with
food, so I had enough to eat, and every night I slept at the bottom of
the stairs, so I could hear if anyone came in."

The Baudelaires nodded sympathetically, and Violet put a comforting
hand on Quigley's shoulder. "We were the same way," Violet said,
"right when we heard the news about our parents. I scarcely remember
what we did and what we said."

"But didn't anyone come looking for you?" Klaus asked.

"'The Daily Punctilio said that I died in the fire, too," Quigley
said. "The article said that my sister and brother were sent off to
Prufrock Preparatory School, and that my parents' estate was under the
care of the city's sixth most important financial advisor."

"Esme' Squalor" Violet and Klaus said simultaneously, a word which
here means "in a disgusted voice, and at the exact same time."

"Right," Quigley said, "but I wasn't interested in that part of the
story. I was determined to go to the school and find my siblings
again. I found an atlas in Dr. Montgomery's library, and studied it
until I found Prufrock Preparatory School. It wasn't too far, so I
started to gather whatever supplies I could find around his house."

"Didn't you think of calling the authorities?" Klaus asked.

"I guess I wasn't thinking very clearly," Quigley admitted. "All I
could think of was finding my siblings."

"Of course," Violet said. "So what happened then?"

"I was interrupted," Quigley said. "Someone walked in just as I was
putting the atlas in a tote bag I found. It was Jacques Snicket,
although I didn't know who he was, of course. But he knew who I was,
and was overjoyed that I was alive after all."

"How did you know you could trust him?" Klaus asked.

"Well, he knew about the secret passageway," Quigley said. In fact, he
knew quite a bit about my family, even though he hadn't seen my
parents in years. And..."

"And?" Violet said.

Quigley gave her a small smile. "And he was very well-read," he said.
"In fact, he was at Dr. Montgomery's house to do a bit more reading.
He said there was an important file that was hidden someplace on the
premises, and he had to stay for a few days to try and complete his
investigation."

"So he didn't take you to the school?" Violet asked.

"He said it wasn't safe for me to be seen," Quigley said. "He
explained that he was part of a secret organization, and that my
parents had been a part of it, too."

"V.F.D.," Klaus said, and Quigley nodded in agreement.

"Duncan and Isadora tried to tell us about V.F.D.," Violet said, "but
they never got the chance. We don't even know what it stands for."

"It seems to stand for many things," Quigley said, flipping pages in
his notebook.

"Nearly everything the organization uses, from the Volunteer Feline
Detectives to the Vernacularly Fastened Door, has the same initials."

"But what is the organization?" Violet asked. "What is V.F.D.?"

"Jacques wouldn't tell me," Quigley said, "but I think the letters
stand for Volunteer Fire Department."

"Volunteer Fire Department," Violet repeated, and looked at her
brother. "What does that mean?"

"In some communities," Klaus said, "there's no official fire
department, and so they rely on volunteers to extinguish fires."


"I know that," Violet said, "but what does that have to do with our
parents, or Count Olaf, or anything that has happened to us? I always
thought that knowing what the letters stood for would solve the
mystery, but I'm as mystified as I ever was."

"Do you think our parents were secretly fighting fires?" Klaus asked.

"But why would they keep it a secret?" Violet asked. "And why would
they have a secret passageway underneath the house?"

"Jacques said that the passageways were built by members of the
organization," Quigley said. "In the case of an emergency, they could
escape to a safe place."

"But the tunnel we found connects our house to the home of Esme'
Squalor," Klaus said. "That's not a safe place."

"Something happened," Quigley said. "Something that changed
everything." He flipped through a few pages of his commonplace book
until he found what he was looking for. "Jacques Snicket called it a
'schism,'" he said, "but I don't know what that word means."

"A schism," Klaus said, "is a division of a previously united group of
people into two or more oppositional parties. It's like a big
argument, with everybody choosing sides."

"That makes sense," Quigley said. "The way Jacques talked, it sounded
like the entire organization was in chaos. Volunteers who were once
working together are now enemies. Places that were once safe are now
dangerous. Both sides are using the same codes, and the same
disguises. Even the V.F.D. insignia used to represent the noble ideals
everyone shared, but now it's all gone up in smoke."

"But how did the schism start?" Violet asked. "What was everyone
fighting over?"

"I don't know," Quigley said. "Jacques didn't have much time to
explain things to me."

"What was he doing?" Klaus asked.

"He was looking for you," Quigley replied. "He showed me a picture of
all three of you, waiting at the dock on some lake, and asked me if
I'd seen you anywhere. He knew that you'd been placed in Count Olaf's
care, and all the terrible things that had happened there. He knew
that you had gone to live with Dr. Montgomery. He even knew about some
of the inventions you made, Violet, and the research you did, Klaus,
and some of Sunny's tooth-related exploits. He wanted to find you
before it was too late."


"Too late for what?" Violet said.

"I don't know," Quigley said with a sigh. "Jacques spent a long time
at Dr. Montgomery's house, but he was too busy conducting his
investigation to explain everything to me. He would stay up all night
reading and copying information into his notebook, and then sleep all
day, or disappear for hours at a time. And then one day, he said he
had to go interview someone in the town of Paltryville , but he never
came back. I waited weeks and weeks for him to return. I read books in
Dr. Montgomery's library, and started a commonplace book of my own.
At first it was difficult to find any information on V.F.D., but I
took notes on anything I could find. I must have read hundreds of
books, but Jacques never returned. Finally, one morning, two things
happened that made me decide not to wait any longer. The first was an
article in The Daily Punctilio saying that my siblings had been
kidnapped from the school. I knew I had to do something. I couldn't
wait for Jacques Snicket or for anyone else."

The Baudelaires nodded in solemn agreement. "What was the second
thing?" Violet asked.

Quigley was silent for a moment, and he reached down to the ground and
scooped up a handful of ashes, letting them fall from his gloved
hands. "I smelled smoke," he said, "and when I opened the door of the
Reptile Room, I saw that someone had thrown a torch through the glass
of the ceiling, starting a fire in the library. Within minutes, the
entire house was in flames."

"Oh," Violet said quietly. "Oh" is a word which usually means
something along the lines of, "I heard you, and I'm not particularly
interested," but in this case, of course, the eldest Baudelaire meant
something entirely different, and it is something that is difficult to
define. She meant "I am sad to hear that Uncle Monty's house burned
down," but that is not all. By "Oh," Violet was also trying to
describe her sadness about all of the fires that had brought Quigley
and Klaus and herself here to the Mortmain Mountains, to huddle in a
circle and try to solve the mystery that surrounded them. When Violet
said "Oh," she was not only thinking of the fire in the Reptile Room,
but the fires that had destroyed the Baudelaire home, and the Quagmire
home, and Heimlich Hospital, and Caligari Carnival, and the V.F.D.
headquarters, where the smell of smoke still lingered around where the
children were sitting. Thinking of all those fires made Violet feel as
if the entire world were going up in flames, and that she and her
siblings and all the other decent people in the world might never find
a place that was truly safe.

"Another fire," Klaus murmured, and Violet knew he was thinking the
same thing. "Where could you go, Quigley?"

"The only place I could think of was Paltryville," Quigley said. "The
last time I saw Jacques he'd said he was going there. I thought if I
went there I might find him again, and see if he could help me rescue
Duncan and Isadora. Dr. Montgomery's atlas showed me how to get there,
but I had to go on foot, because I was afraid that anyone who might
offer me a ride would be an enemy. It was a long time before I finally
arrived, but as soon as I stepped into town I saw a large building
that matched the tattoo on Jacques Snicket's ankle. I thought it might
be a safe place to go."

"Dr. Orwell's office!" Klaus cried. "That's not a safe place to go!"

"Klaus was hypnotized there," Violet explained, "and Count Olaf was
disguised as--"

"As a receptionist," Quigley finished. "I know. His fake nameplate was
still on the desk. The office was deserted, but I could tell that
Jacques had been there, because there were some notes in his
handwriting that he'd left on the desk. With those notes, and the
information I'd read in Dr. Montgomery's library, I learned about the
V.F.D. headquarters. So instead of waiting for Jacques again, I set
out to find the organization. I thought they were my best hope of
rescuing my siblings."

"So you set off to the Mortmain Mountains by yourself?" Violet asked.

"Not quite by myself," Quigley said. "I had this backpack that Jacques
left behind, with the Verdant Flammable Devices and a few other items,
and I had my commonplace book. And eventually, I ran into the Snow
Scouts, and realized that hiding among them would be the quickest way
to reach Mount Fraught." He turned a page in his commonplace book and
examined his notes. "Remarkable Phenomena of the Mortmain Mountains,
which I read in Dr Montgomery's library, had a hidden chapter that
told me all about the Vertical Flame Diversion and the Vernacularly
Fastened Door."

Klaus looked over Quigley's shoulder to read his notes. "I should have
read that book when I had the chance," he said, shaking his head. "If
we had known about V.F.D. when we were living with Uncle Monty, we
might have avoided all the trouble that followed."

"When we were living with Uncle Monty," Violet reminded him, "we were
too busy trying to escape Count Olaf's clutches to do any additional
research."

"I've had plenty of time to do research," Quigley said, "but I still
haven't found all the answers I'm looking for. I still haven't found
Duncan and Isadora, and I still don't know where Jacques Snicket is."

"He's dead," Klaus said, very quietly. "Count Olaf murdered him."

"I thought you might say that," Quigley said. "I knew something was
very wrong when he didn't return. But what about my siblings? Do you
know what happened to them?"

"They're safe, Quigley," Violet said. "We think they're safe. We
rescued them from Olaf's clutches, and they escaped with a man named
Hector."

"Escaped?" Quigley repeated. "Where did they go?"

"We don't know," Klaus admitted. "Hector built a self-sustaining hot
air mobile home. It was like a flying house, kept in the air by a
bunch of balloons, and Hector said it could stay up in the sky
forever."

"We tried to climb aboard," Violet said, "but Count Olaf managed to
stop us."

"So you don't know where they are?" Quigley asked.

"I'm afraid not," Violet said, and patted his hand. "But Duncan and
Isadora are intrepid people, Quigley. They survived for quite some
time in Olaf's clutches, taking notes on his schemes and trying to
pass on the information to us."

"Violet's right," Klaus said. "I'm sure that wherever they are,
they're continuing their research. Eventually, they'll find out you're
alive, and they'll come looking for you, just like you went looking
for them."

The two Baudelaires looked at one another and shivered. They had been
talking about Quigley's family, of course, but they felt as if they
were talking about their own. "I'm sure that if your parents are
alive, they're looking for you, too," Quigley said, as if he'd read
their minds. "And Sunny, too. Do you know where she is?"

"Someplace nearby," Violet said. "She's with Count Olaf, and Olaf
wanted to find the headquarters, too."

"Maybe Olaf has already been here," Quigley said, looking around at
the wreckage. "Maybe he's the one who burned this place down."

"I don't think so," Klaus said. "He wouldn't have had time to burn
this whole place down. We were right on his trail. Plus, I don't think
this place burned down all at once."

"Why not?" Quigley said.

"It's too big," Klaus replied. "If the whole headquarters were
burning, the sky would be covered in smoke."

"That's true," Violet said. "That much smoke would arouse too much
suspicion."

"Where there's smoke," Quigley said, "there's fire."

Violet and Klaus turned to their friend to agree, but Quigley was not
looking at the two Baudelaires. He was looking past them, toward the
frozen pool and the two frozen tributaries, where the enormous windows
of the V.F.D. kitchen had once stood, and where I once chopped
broccoli while the woman I loved mixed up a spicy peanut sauce to go
with it, and he was pointing up toward the sky, where my associates
and I used to watch the volunteer eagles who could spot smoke from a
very great distance.

That afternoon, there were no eagles in the skies over the Mortmain
Mountains, but as Violet and Klaus stood up and looked in the
direction Quigley was pointing, there was something in the sky that
caught their attention. Because when Quigley Quagmire said, "Where
there's smoke, there's fire," he was not referring to Klaus's theory
about the destruction of V.F.D. headquarters. He was talking about the
sight of green smoke, wafting up into the sky from the peak of Mount
Fraught, at the top of the slippery slope.


CHAPTER NINE

The two elder Baudelaires stood for a moment with Quigley, gazing up
at the small plume, a word which here means "mysterious cloud of green
smoke." After the long, strange story he had told them about surviving
the fire and what he had learned about V.F.D., they could scarcely
believe that they were confronting another mystery.

"It's a Verdant Flammable Device," Quigley said. "There's someone at
the top of the waterfall, sending a signal."

"Yes," Violet said, "but who?"

"Maybe it's a volunteer, who escaped from the fire," Klaus said.
"They're signaling to see if there are any other volunteers nearby."

"Or it could be a trap," Quigley said. "They could be luring
volunteers up to the peak in order to ambush them. Remember, the codes
of V.F.D. are used by both sides of the schism."

"It hardly seems like a code," Violet said. "We know that someone is
communicating, but we don't have the faintest idea who they are, or
what they're saying."

"This is what it must be like," Klaus said thoughtfully, "when Sunny
talks to people who don't know her very well."

At the mention of Sunny's name, the Baudelaires were reminded of how
much they missed her. "Whether it's a volunteer or a trap," Violet
said, "it might be our only chance to find our sister."

"Or my sister and brother," Quigley said.

"Let's signal back," Klaus said. "Do you still have those Verdant
Flammable Devices, Quigley?"

"Of course," Quigley said, taking the box of green tubes out of his
backpack, "but Bruce saw my matches and confiscated them, because
children shouldn't play with matches."

"Confiscated them?" Klaus said. "Do you think he's an enemy of
V.F.D.?"

"If everyone who said that children shouldn't play with matches was an
enemy of V.F.D.," Violet said with a smile, "then we wouldn't have a
chance of survival."

"But how are we going to light these without matches?" Quigley asked.

Violet reached into her pocket. It was a bit tricky to tie her hair up
in a ribbon, as all four drafts in the Valley of Four Drafts were
blowing hard, but at last her hair was out of her eyes, and the gears
and levers of her inventing mind began to move as she gazed up at the
mysterious signal.

But of course this signal was neither a volunteer nor a trap. It was a
baby, with unusually large teeth and a way of talking that some people
found confusing. When Sunny Baudelaire had said "lox," for example,
the member of Count Olaf's troupe had assumed she was simply babbling,
rather than explaining how she was going to cook the salmon that the
hook-handed man had caught. "Lox" is a word which refers to smoked
salmon, and it is a delicious way to enjoy freshly caught fish,
particularly if one has the appropriate accoutrements, a phrase which
here means "bagels, cream cheese, sliced cucumber, black pepper, and
capers, which can be eaten along with the lox for an enjoyable meal."
Lox also has an additional benefit of producing quite a bit of smoke
as it is prepared, and this is the reason Sunny chose this method of
preparing salmon, as opposed to gravlax, which is salmon marinated for
several days in a mixture of spices, or sashimi, which is salmon cut
into pleasing shapes and simply served raw. Remembering what Count
Olaf had said about being able to see everything and everyone from the
peak where he had brought her, the youngest Baudelaire realized that
the phrase "where there's smoke there's fire" might be able to help
her. As Violet and Klaus heard Quigley's extraordinary tale at the
bottom of the frozen waterfall, Sunny hurried to prepare lox and send
a signal to her siblings, who she hoped were nearby. First, she nudged
the Verdant Flammable Device--which she, like everyone at the peak,
believed was a cigarette--into a small patch of weeds, in order to
increase the smoke. Then she dragged over the covered casserole dish
that she had been using as a makeshift bed, and placed the salmon
inside it. In no time at all, the fish caught by the hook-handed man
were absorbing the heat and smoke from the simmering green tube, and a
large plume of green smoke was floating up into the sky above Mount
Fraught. Sunny gazed up at the signal she made and couldn't help
smiling. The last time she had been separated from her siblings, she
had simply waited in the birdcage for them to come and rescue her, but
she had grown since then, and was able to take an active part in
defeating Count Olaf and his troupe while still having time to prepare
a seafood dish

"Something smells delicious," said one of the white-faced women,
walking by the casserole dish. "I must admit, I had some doubts that
an infant should be in charge of the cooking, but your salmon recipe
seems like it will be very tasty indeed."

"There's a word for the way she's preparing the fish," the hook-handed
man said, "but I can't remember what it is."

"Lox," Sunny said, but no one heard her over the sound of Count Olaf
storming out of his tent, followed by Esme' and the two sinister
visitors. Olaf was clutching the Snicket file and glaring down at
Sunny with his shiny, shiny eyes.

"Put that smoke out at once!" he ordered. "I thought you were a
terrified orphan prisoner, but I'm beginning to think you're a spy!"

"What do you mean, Olaf?" asked the other white-faced woman. "She's
using Esme''s cigarette to cook us some fish."

"Someone might see the smoke," Esme' snarled, as if she had not been
smoking herself just moments ago. "Where there's smoke, there's fire."

The man with a beard but no hair picked up a handful of snow and threw
it onto the weeds, extinguishing the Verdant Flammable Device. "Who
are you signaling to, baby?" he asked, in his strange, hoarse voice.
"If you're a spy, we're going to toss you off this mountain."

"Goo goo," Sunny said, which meant something along the lines of "I'm
going to pretend I'm a helpless baby, instead of answering your
question."

"You see?" the white-faced woman said, looking nervously at the man
with a beard but no hair. "She's just a helpless baby."

"Perhaps you're right," said the woman with hair but no beard.
"Besides, there's no reason to toss a baby off a mountain unless you
absolutely have to."

"Babies can come in handy," Count Olaf agreed. "In fact, I've been
thinking about recruiting more young people into my troupe. They're
less likely to complain about doing my bidding."

"But we never complain," the hook-handed man said. "I try to be as
accommodating as possible."

"Enough chitchat," said the man with a beard but no hair. "We have a
lot of scheming to do, Olaf. I have some information that might help
you with your recruiting idea, and according to the Snicket file,
there's one more safe place for the volunteers to gather."

"The last safe place," said the sinister woman. "We have to find it
and burn it down."

"And once we do," Count Olaf said, "the last evidence of our plans
will be completely destroyed. We'll never have to worry about the
authorities again."

"Where is this last safe place?" asked Kevin.

Olaf opened his mouth to answer, but the woman with hair but no beard
stopped him with a quick gesture and a suspicious glance down at
Sunny. "Not in front of the toothy orphan," she said, in her deep,
deep voice. "If she learned what we were up to, she'd never sleep
again, and you need your infant servant full of energy. Send her away,
and we'll make our plans."

"Of course," Olaf said, smiling nervously at the sinister visitors.
"Orphan, go to my car and remove all of the potato chip crumbs from
the interior by blowing as hard as you can."

"Futil," Sunny said, which meant something like, "That is an
absolutely impossible chore," but she walked unsteadily toward the car
while Olaf's troupe laughed and gathered around the flat rock to hear
the new scheme. Passing the extinguished fire and the covered
casserole dish where she would sleep that night, Sunny sighed sadly,
thinking that her signal plan must have failed. But when she reached
Olaf's car and gazed down at the frozen waterfall, she saw something
that lightened her spirits, a phrase which here means "an identical
plume of green smoke, coming from the very bottom of the slope." The
youngest Baudelaire looked down at the smoke and smiled. "Sibling,"
she said to herself. Sunny, of course, could not be certain that it
was Violet and Klaus who were signaling to her, but she could hope it
was so, and hope was enough to cheer her up as she opened the door of
the car and began blowing at the crumbs Olaf and his troupe had
scattered all over the upholstery.

But at the bottom of the frozen waterfall, the two elder Baudelaires
did not feel nearly as hopeful as they stood with Quigley and watched
the green smoke disappear from the highest peak.

"Someone put out the Verdant Flammable Device," Quigley said, holding
the green tube to one side so he wouldn't smell the smoke. "What do
you think that means?"

"I don't know," Violet said, and sighed. "This isn't working."

"Of course it's working," Klaus said. "It's working perfectly. You
noticed that the afternoon sun was reflecting off the frozen
waterfall, and it gave you the idea to use the scientific principles
of the convergence and refraction of light--just like you did on Lake
Lachrymose, when we were battling the leeches. So you used Colette's
hand mirror to catch the sun's rays and reflect them onto the end of
the Verdant Flammable Device, so we could light it and send a signal."

"Klaus is right," Quigley said. "It couldn't have worked better."

"Thank you," Violet said, "but that's not what I mean. I mean this
code isn't working. We still don't know who's up on the peak, or why
they were signaling us, and now the signal has stopped, but we still
don't know what it means."

"Maybe we should extinguish our Verdant Flammable Device, too," Klaus
said.

"Maybe," Violet agreed, "or maybe we should go up to the top of the
waterfall and see for ourselves who is there."

Quigley frowned, and took out his commonplace book. "The only way up
to the highest peak," he said, "is the path that the Snow Scouts are
taking. We'd have to go back through the Vernacularly Fastened Door,
back down the Vertical Flame Diversion, back into the Volunteer Feline
Detective cave, rejoin the scouts and hike for a long time."

"That's not the only way up to the peak," Violet said with a smile.

"Yes, it is," Quigley insisted. "Look at the map."

"Look at the waterfall," Violet replied, and all three children looked
up at the shiny slope.

"Do you mean," Klaus said, "that you think you can invent something
which can get us up a frozen waterfall?"

But Violet was already tying her hair out of her eyes again, and
looking around at the ruins of the V.F.D. headquarters. "I'll need
that ukulele that you took from the caravan," she said to Klaus, "and
that half-melted candelabra over there by the dining room table."
Klaus took the ukulele from his coat pocket and handed it to his
sister, and then walked over to the table to retrieve the strange,
melted object. "Unless you need any further assistance," he said, "I
think I might go examine the wreckage of the library and see if any
documents have survived. We might as well learn as much from this
headquarters as we can."

"Good idea," Quigley said, and reached into his backpack. He brought
out a notebook much like his own, except it had a dark blue cover. "I
have a spare notebook," he said. "You might be interested in starting
a commonplace book of your own."

"That's very kind of you," Klaus said. "I'll write down anything I
find. Do you want to join the search?"

"I think I'll stay here," Quigley said, looking at Violet. "I've heard
quite a bit about Violet Baudelaire's marvelous inventions, and I'd
like to see her at work."

Klaus nodded, and walked off to the iron archway marking the entrance
of the ruined library, while Violet blushed and leaned down to pick up
one of the forks that had survived the fire.

It is one of the great sadnesses of the Baudelaire case that Violet
never got to meet a man named C. M. Kornbluth, an associate of mine
who spent most of his life living and working in the Valley of Four
Drafts as a mechanical instructor at the V.F.D. headquarters. Mr.
Kornbluth was a quiet and secretive man, so secretive that no one ever
knew who he was, where he came from, or even what the C or the M stood
for, and he spent much of his time holed up in his dormitory room
writing strange stories, or gazing sadly out the windows of the
kitchen. The one thing that put Mr. Kornbluth in a good mood would be
a particularly promising mechanical student. If a young man showed an
interest in deep sea radar, Mr. Kornbluth would take off his glasses
and smile. If a young woman brought him a staple gun she had built,
Mr. Kornbluth would clap his hands in excitement. And if a pair of
twins asked him how to properly reroute some copper wiring, he would
take a paper bag out of his pocket and offer some pistachio nuts to
anyone who happened to be around. So, when I think of Violet
Baudelaire standing in the wreckage of the V.F.D. headquarters,
carefully taking the strings off the ukulele and bending some of the
forks in half, I can imagine Mr. Kornbluth, even though he and his
pistachios are long gone, turning from the window, smiling at the
Baudelaire inventor, and saying, "Beatrice, come over here! Look at
what this girl is making!"

"What are you making?" Quigley asked.

"Something that will get us up that waterfall," Violet replied. "I
only wish that Sunny were here. Her teeth would be perfect to slice
these ukulele strings into halves."

"I might have something that could help " Quigley said, looking
through his backpack "When I was in Dr. Orwell's office, I found these
fake fingernails. They're a horrible shade of pink, but they're quite
sharp."

Violet took a fingernail from Quigley and looked at it carefully. "I
think Count Olaf was wearing these," she said, "as part of his
receptionist disguise. It's so strange that you have been following in
our footsteps all this time, and yet we never even knew you were
alive."

"I knew you were alive," Quigley said. "Jacques Snicket told me all
about you, Klaus, Sunny, and even your parents. He knew them quite
well before you were born."

"I thought so," Violet said, cutting the ukulele strings. "In the
photograph we found, my parents are standing with Jacques Snicket and
another man."

"He's probably Jacques's brother," Quigley aid. "Jacques told me that
he was working closely with his two siblings on an important file."

"The Snicket file," Violet said. "We were hoping to find it here."

Quigley looked up at the frozen waterfall. "Maybe whoever signaled us
will know where it is," he said.

"We'll find out soon enough," Violet said. "Please take off your
shoes."

"My shoes?" Quigley asked.

"The waterfall will be very slippery," Violet explained, "so I'm using
the ukulele strings to tie these bent forks to the toe area, to make
fork-assisted climbing shoes. We'll hold two more forks in our hands.
Tines of the forks are almost as sharp as Sunny's teeth, so the
fork-assisted climbing shoes will easily dig into the ice with each
step, and enable us to keep our balance."

"But what's the candelabra for?" Quigley asked, unlacing his shoes.

"I'm going to use it as an ice tester," Violet said. "A moving body of
water, such as a waterfall, is rarely completely frozen. There are
probably places on that slope where there is only a thin layer of ice,
particularly with False Spring on its way. If we stuck our forks
through the ice and hit water, we'd lose our grip and fall. So I'll
tap on the ice with the candelabra before each step, to find the solid
places we should climb."

"It sounds like a difficult journey," Quigley said.

"No more difficult than climbing up the Vertical Flame Diversion,"
Violet said, tying a fork onto Quigley's shoe. "I'm using the Sumac
knot, so it should hold tight. Now, all we need is Klaus's shoes,
and--"

"I'm sorry to interrupt, but I think this might be important," Klaus
said, and Violet turned to see that her brother had returned. He was
holding the dark blue notebook in one hand and a small, burnt piece of
paper in the other. "I found this scrap of paper in a pile of ashes,"
he said. "It's from some kind of code book."

"What does it say?" Violet asked.

"'In the e flagration resulting in the destruction of a sanc,'" Klaus
read, "' teers should avail themselves of Verbal Fri Dialogue, which
is concealed accordingly.'"

"That doesn't make any sense," Quigley said. "Do you think it's in
code?"

"Sort of," Klaus said. "Parts of the sentence are burned away, so you
have to figure the sentence out as if it's encoded. 'Flagration' is
probably the last part of the word 'conflagration,' a fancy word for
fire, and 'sanc' is probably the beginning of the word 'sanctuary,'
which means a safe place. So the sentence probably began something
like, 'In the event of a conflagration resulting in the destruction of
a sanctuary.'"

Violet stood up and looked over his shoulder. "'Teers,'" she said, "is
probably 'volunteers,' but I don't know what 'avail themselves'
means."

"It means 'to make use of,'" Klaus said, 'like you're availing
yourself of the ukulele and those forks. Don't you see? This says that
in case a safe place burns down, they'll leave some sort of
message--'Verbal Fri Dialogue.'"

"But what could 'Verbal Fri Dialogue' be?" Quigley asked. "Friends?
Frisky?"

"Frilly?" Violet guessed. "Frightening?"

"But it says that it's concealed accordingly," Klaus pointed out.
"That means that the dialogue is hidden in a logical way. If it were
Verbal Waterfall Dialogue, it would be hidden in the waterfall. So
none of those words can be right. Where would someone leave a message
where fire couldn't destroy it?"

"But fire destroys everything," Violet said. "Look at the
headquarters. Nothing is left standing except the library entrance,
and..."

"... and the refrigerator," Klaus finished. "Or, we might say, the
fridge."

"Verbal Fridge Dialogue!" Quigley said.

"The volunteers left a message," said Klaus, who was already halfway
to the refrigerator, "in the only place they knew wouldn't be affected
by the fire."

"And the one place their enemies wouldn't think of looking," Quigley
said. "After all, there's never anything terribly important in the
refrigerator."

What Quigley said, of course, is not entirely true. Like an envelope,
a hollow figurine, and a coffin, a refrigerator can hold all sorts of
things, and they may turn out to be very important depending on what
kind of day you are having. A refrigerator may hold an icepack, for
example, which would be important if you had been wounded. A
refrigerator may hold a bottle of water, which would be important if
you were dying of thirst. And a refrigerator may hold a basket of
strawberries, which would be important if a maniac said to you, "If
you don't give me a basket of strawberries right now, I'm going to
poke you with this large stick." But when the two elder Baudelaires
and Quigley Quagmire opened the refrigerator, they found nothing that
would help someone who was wounded, dying of thirst, or being
threatened by a strawberry-crazed, stick-carrying maniac or anything
that looked important at all. The fridge was mostly empty, with just a
few of the usual things people keep in their refrigerators and rarely
use, including a jar of mustard, a container of olives, three jars of
different kinds of jam, a bottle of lemon juice, and one lonely pickle
in a small glass jug.

"There's nothing here," Violet said.

"Look in the crisper," Quigley said, pointing to a drawer in the
refrigerator traditionally used for storing fruits and vegetables.
Klaus opened the drawer and pulled out a few strands of a green plant
with tiny, skinny leaves.

"It smells like dill," Klaus said, "and it's quite crisp, as if it
were picked yesterday."

"Very Fresh Dill," Quigley said.

"Another mystery," Violet said, and tears filled her eyes. "We have
nothing but mysteries. We don't know where Sunny is. We don't know
where Count Olaf is. We don't know who's signaling to us at the top of
the waterfall, or what they're trying to say, and now here's a
mysterious message in a mysterious ode in a mysterious refrigerator,
and a bunch of mysterious herbs in the crisper. I'm tired of
mysteries. I want someone to help us."

"We can help each other," Klaus said. "We have your inventions, and
Quigley's maps, and my research."

"And we're all very well-read," Quigley said. "That should be enough
to solve any mystery."

Violet sighed, and kicked at something that lay on the ashen ground.
It was the small shell of a pistachio nut, blackened from the fire
that destroyed the headquarters. "It's like we're members of V.F.D.
already," she said. "We're sending signals, and breaking codes, and
finding secrets in the ruins of a fire."

"Do you think our parents would be proud of us," Klaus asked, "for
following in their footsteps?"

"I don't know," Violet said. "After all, they kept V.F.D. a secret."

"Maybe they were going to tell us later," Klaus said.

"Or maybe they hoped we would never find out," Violet said.

"I keep wondering the same thing," Quigley said. "If I could travel
back in time to the moment my mother showed me the secret passageway
under the library, I would ask her why she was keeping these secrets."

"That's one more mystery," Violet said sadly, and looked up at the
slippery slope. It was getting later and later in the afternoon, and
the frozen waterfall looked less and less shiny in the fading
sunlight, as if time were running out to climb to the top and see who
had been signaling to them. "We should each investigate the mystery
we're most likely to solve," she said. "I'll climb up the waterfall,
and solve the mystery of the Verdant Flammable Device by learning
who's up there, and what they want. You should stay down here, Klaus,
and solve the mystery of the Verbal Fridge Dialogue, by learning the
code and discovering what the message is."

"And I'll help you both," Quigley said, taking out his purple
notebook. "I'll leave my commonplace book with Klaus, in case it's any
help with the codes. And I'll climb up the waterfall with you, Violet,
in case you need my help."

"Are you sure?" Violet asked. "You've already taken us this far,
Quigley. You don't have to risk your life any further."

"We'll understand," Klaus said, "if you want to leave and search for
your siblings."

"Don't be absurd," Quigley said. "We're all part of this mystery,
whatever it is. Of course I'm going to help you."

The two Baudelaires looked at one another and smiled. It is so rare in
this world to meet a trustworthy person who truly wants to help you,
and finding such a person can make you feel warm and safe, even if you
are in the middle of a windy valley high up in the mountains.  For a
moment, as their friend smiled back at them, it seemed as if all the
mysteries had been solved already, even with Sunny still separated
from them, and Count Olaf still at large, and the abandoned V.F.D.
headquarters still in ashes around them. Just knowing that they had
found a person like Quigley Quagmire made Violet and Klaus feel as if
every code made sense, and every signal was clear.

Violet stepped forward, her fork-assisted climbing shoes making small,
determined noises on the ground, and took Quigley's hand. "Thank you,"
she said, "for volunteering."


CHAPTER TEN

Violet and Quigley walked carefully across the frozen pool until they
reached the bottom of the waterfall. "Good luck!" Klaus called, from
the archway of the ruined library. He was polishing his glasses, as he
often did before embarking on serious research.

"Good luck to you!" Violet replied, shouting over the rush of the
mountain winds, and as she looked back at her brother, she remembered
when the two siblings were trying to stop the caravan as it hurtled
down the mountain. Klaus had wanted to say something to her, in case
the drag chute and the mixture of sticky substances hadn't worked.
Violet had the same feeling now as she prepared to climb the frozen
waterfall and leave her brother behind at the ashy remains of the
V.F.D. headquarters. "Klaus--" she said.

Klaus put his glasses on and gave his sister his bravest smile.
"Whatever you're thinking of saying," he said, "say it when you
return."

Violet nodded, and tapped the candelabra against a spot on the ice.
She heard a deep thunk!, as if she were tapping something very solid.
"We'll start here," she said to Quigley. "Brace yourself."

The expression "brace yourself," as I'm sure you know, does not mean
to take some metal wiring and rivets and other orthodontic materials
and apply them to your own teeth in order straighten them. The
expression simply means "get ready for something that will probably be
difficult,"and it was indeed very difficult to climb a frozen
waterfall in the middle of a windswept valley with nothing but a
candelabra and a few well-placed forks to aid the two children in
their climb. It took a few moments for Violet and Quigley to work her
invention properly, and push the forks into the ice just far enough to
hold them there, but not so far that they would be permanently stuck,
and once both of them were in position, Violet had to reach up as far
as she could and tap the candelabra on the ice above them to find the
next solid place to climb. For the first few steps, it seemed like
ascending the icy slope in this manner would be impossible, but as
time went on, and the two volunteers grew more and more skillful with
the forktipped climbing shoes and the candelabra ice-tester, it became
clear that once again Violet's inventing skills would carry the day, a
phrase which here means "enable Violet Baudelaire and Quigley Quagmire
to climb up a frozen waterfall after bracing themselves for the
difficult journey."

"Your invention is working," Quigley called up to Violet. "These
fork-assisted climbing shoes are marvelous."

"They do seem to be working," Violet agreed, "but let's not celebrate
just yet. We have a long way to go."

"My sister wrote a couplet about that very thing," Quigley said, and
recited Isadora's poem: "Celebrate when you're half-done, And the
finish won't be half as fun."


Violet smiled, and reached up to test the ice above her. "Isadora is a
good poet," Violet said, "and her poems have come in handy more than
once. When we were at the Village of Fowl Devotees, she led us to her
location by hiding a secret message in a series of couplets."

"I wonder if that's a code she learned from V.F.D.," Quigley said, "or
if she made it up herself."

"I don't know," Violet said thoughtfully. "She and Duncan were the
first to tell us about V.F.D., but it never occurred to me that they
might already be members. When I think about it, however, the code she
used was similar to one that our Aunt Josephine used. They both hid a
secret location within a note, and waited for us to discover the
hidden message. Maybe they were all volunteers." She removed her left
fork-assisted climbing shoe from the ice, and kicked it back in a few
inches up to further her climb. "Maybe all our guardians have been
members of V.F.D., on one side or the other of the schism."

"It's hard to believe," Quigley said, "that we've always been
surrounded by people carrying out secret errands, and never known it."

"It's hard to believe that we're climbing a frozen waterfall in the
Mortmain Mountains," Violet replied, "and yet, here we are. There
Quigley, do you see the ledge where my left-fork is? It's solid enough
for both of us to sit for a moment and catch our breath."

"Good," Quigley said. "I have a small bag of carrots in my backpack we
can eat to regain our energy." The triplet climbed up to where Violet
was sitting, on a small ledge scarcely the size of a sofa, and slid so
he was sitting next to her. The two climbers could see that they had
traveled farther than they'd thought. Far below them were the
blackened ruins of the headquarters, and Klaus was only a small speck
near a tiny iron archway. Quigley handed Violet a carrot, and she bit
down on it thoughtfully.

"Sunny loves raw carrots," Violet said. "I hope that she's eating
well, wherever she is."

"I hope my siblings are eating well, too," Quigley said. "My father
always used to say that a good meal can cheer one up considerably."

"My father always said the same thing," Violet said, looking at
Quigley curiously. "Do you think that was a code, too?"

Quigley shrugged and sighed. Small bits of ice from the waterfall fell
from the ends of forks and blew away in the wind. "It's like we never
really knew our parents," he said.

"We knew them," Violet said. "They just had a few secrets, that's all.
Everyone should keep a few secrets."

"I suppose so,' Quigley said, "but they might have mentioned that they
were in a secret organization with a headquarters hidden in the
Mortmain Mountains."

"Maybe they didn't want us to find out about such a dangerous place,"
Violet said, peering off the ledge, "although if you have to hide a
headquarters, it's a beautiful place to do it. Aside from the remains
of the fire, this is a very lovely view."

"Very lovely indeed," Quigley said, but he was not looking at the view
beneath him. He was looking beside him, where Violet Baudelaire was
sitting.

Many things have been taken from the three Baudelaires. Their parents
were taken, of course, and their home was taken from them, by a
terrible fire. Their various guardians were taken from them, because
they were murdered by Count Olaf or were simply miserable guardians
who soon lost interest in three young children with nowhere to go. The
Baudelaires' dignity was taken from them, on the occasions when the
siblings were forced to wear absurd disguises, and recently they had
been taken from one another, with the kidnapped Sunny doing chores at
the top of the frozen waterfall while Violet and Klaus learned the
secrets of V.F.D. at the bottom. But one thing that was taken from the
Baudelaires that is not often discussed is their privacy, a word which
here means "time by oneself, without anyone watching or interfering.'
Unless you are a hermit or half of a pair of Siamese twins, you
probably enjoy taking the occasional break from members of your family
to enjoy some privacy, perhaps with a friend or companion, in your
room or in a railway car you have managed to sneak aboard. But since
that dreadful day at Briny Beach, when Mr. Poe arrived to tell the
Baudelaires that their parents had perished, the three children had
scarcely had any privacy at all. From the small, dark bedroom where
they slept at Count Olaf's house, to the crowded caravan at Caligari
Carnival, and all of the other woeful places in between, the
Baudelaires' situation was always so desperate and cramped that they
were rarely able to spare a moment for a bit of private time.

So, as Violet and Quigley rest for a few minutes more on a ledge
halfway up the frozen waterfall, I will take this opportunity to give
them a bit of privacy, by not writing down anything more of what
happened between these two friends on that chilly afternoon. Certainly
there are aspects of my own personal life that I will never write
down, however precious they are to me, and I will offer the eldest
Baudelaire the same courtesy. I will tell you that the two young
people resumed their climb, and that the afternoon slowly turned to
evening and that both Violet and Quigley had small secret smiles on
their faces as the candelabra ice-tester and the fork-assisted
climbing shoes helped them both get closer and closer to the
mountains' highest peak, but there has been so little privacy in the
life of Violet Baudelaire that I will allow her to keep a few
important moments to herself, rather than sharing them with my
distressed and weeping readers.

"We're almost there," Violet said. "It's difficult to see with the sun
going down, but I believe we're just about at the top of the peak."

"I can't believe we've been climbing all afternoon," Quigley said.

"Not all afternoon," she reminded him with a shy smile. "I guess this
waterfall is about as high as 667 Dark Avenue. It took a very long
time to go up and down that elevator shaft trying to rescue your
siblings. I hope this is a more successful journey."

"Me, too," Quigley said. "What do you think we will find at the top?"

"Set!" came the reply.

"I couldn't hear you over the wind," Quigley said. "What did you say?"

"I didn't say anything," Violet said. She squinted above her, trying
to see in the last of the sunset, and scarcely daring to hope that she
had heard correctly.

Out of all the words in the English language, the word "set" has the
most definitions, and if you open a good dictionary and read the
word's long, long entry, you will begin to think that "set" is
scarcely a word at all, only a sound that means something different
depending on who is saying it. If a group of jazz musicians says
"set," for instance, they are probably referring to the songs they are
planning to play at a club that evening, assuming it doesn't burn
down. If the owner of a restaurant uses the word "set," they might
mean group of matching wineglasses, or a bunch of waitresses who look
exactly alike. A librarian will say "set" to refer to a collection of
books that are all by the same author or about the same subject, and
an Egyptologist will use the word "set" to refer to the ancient god of
evil, although he does not come up very often in conversation. But
when Violet heard the word "set" from the top of Mount Fraught, she
did not think there was a group of jazz musicians, a restaurant owner,
a librarian, or an Egyptologist talking about jazz tunes, wineglasses,
waitresses, thematically linked books, or a black, immoral aardvark
who is the sworn enemy of the god Osiris. She reached her fork as high
as she could so she could climb closer, and saw the rays of the sunset
reflect off a large tooth, and Violet knew that this time, the
definition of "set" was "I knew you would find me!" and the speaker
was Sunny Baudelaire. "Set!" Sunny said again.

"Sunny!" Violet cried.

"Sssh!" Sunny said.

"What is going on?" Quigley asked, several forksteps behind Violet.


"It's Sunny," Violet said, and hoisted herself onto the peak to see
her baby sister, standing next to Count Olaf's car and grinning from
ear to ear. Without another word, the two Baudelaire sisters hugged
fiercely, Violet taking care not to poke Sunny with one of the forks
she was holding. By the time Quigley reached the top of the peak and
pulled himself up to lean against one of the car's tires, the two
Baudelaires were smiling at each other with tears in their eyes.

"I knew we'd see you again, Sunny," Violet said. "I just knew it."

"Klaus?" Sunny asked.

"He's safe and nearby," Violet said. "He knew we could find you, too."

"Set," Sunny agreed, but then she noticed Quigley and her eyes grew
wide.

"Quagmire?" she asked in amazement.

"Yes," Violet said. "This is Quigley Quagmire, Sunny. He survived the
fire after all."

Sunny walked unsteadily over to Quigley and shook his hand. "He led us
to the headquarters, Sunny, with a map he drew himself."

"Arigato," Sunny said, which meant something like, "I appreciate your
help, Quigley."

"Was it you who signaled us?" Quigley asked.

"Yep," Sunny said. "Lox."

"Count Olaf's been making you do the cooking?" Violet asked in
amazement.

"Vaccurum," Sunny said.

"Olaf even made her clean crumbs out of the car," Violet translated to
Quigley, "by blowing as hard as she could."

"That's ridiculous!" Quigley said.

"Cinderella," Sunny said. She meant something along the lines of,
"I've had to do all of the chores, while being humiliated at every
turn," but Violet had no time to translate over the sound of Count
Olaf's scratchy voice.

"Where are you, Babylaire?" he asked, adding an absurd nickname to his
list of insults. "I've thought of more tasks for you to perform."

The three children looked at one another in panic. "Hide," Sunny
whispered, and there was no need for translation. Violet and Quigley
looked around the desolate landscape of the peak for a place to hide,
but there was only one place to go.

"Under the car," Violet said, and she and Quigley wriggled underneath
the long, black automobile, which was as dirty and smelly as its
owner. As an inventor, the eldest Baudelaire had stared closely at
automotive machinery plenty of times, but she had never seen such an
extreme state of disrepair, a phrase which here means "an underside of
an automobile in such bad shape that it was dripping oil on her and
her companion." But Violet and Quigley didn't have a moment to waste
thinking of their discomfort. They had no sooner moved their
fork-assisted climbing shoes out of view when Count Olaf and his
companions arrived. From underneath he car, the two volunteers could
see only the villain's tattoo on the filthy ankle above his left shoe
and a pair of very stylish pumps, decorated with glitter and tiny
paintings of eyes, that could only belong to Esme' Squalor.

"All we've had to eat all day is that smoked salmon, and it's almost
dinnertime," Count Olaf said. "You'd better get cooking, orphan."

"Tomorrow is False Spring," Esme' said, "and it would be very in to
have a False Spring dinner."

"Did you hear that, toothy?" Olaf asked. "My girlfriend wants a
stylish dinner. Get to work."

"Olaf, we need you," said a very deep voice, and Violet and Quigley
saw two pairs of sinister black shoes appear behind the villain and
his girlfriend, whose shoes twitched nervously at the sight of them.
All of a sudden, it seemed much colder underneath the car, and Violet
had to push her legs against the tires, so they would not shiver
against the mechanics of the underside and be heard.

"Yes, Olaf," agreed the hoarse voice of the man with a beard but no
hair, although Violet and Quigley could not see him. "Our recruitment
plan will happen first thing in the morning so we need you to help
spread the net out on the ground."

"Can't you ask one of our employees?" asked Esme'. "There's the
hook-handed man the two white-faced women, and the three freaks we
picked up at the carnival. That's eight people, if you include
yourselves, to spread out the net. Why should we do it?"

The four black shoes stepped toward Esme''s stylish pumps and Olaf's
tattoo. "You'll do it," said the woman with hair but no beard,
"because I say so."

There was a long, ominous pause, and then Count Olaf gave a little
high-pitched laugh. "That's a good point," he said. "Come on, Esme'.
We've bossed around the baby, so there's nothing else to do around
here anyway."

"That's true," Esme' agreed. "In fact, I was thinking about taking up
smoking again, because I'm bored. Do you have any more of those green
cigarettes?"

"I'm afraid not," replied the man with a beard but no hair, leading
the villains away from the car. "That's the only one I found."

"That's too bad," Esme' said. "I don't like the taste or the smell,
and they're very bad for you, but cigarettes are very in and I'd like
to smoke another one."

"Maybe there's another one in the ruins of headquarters," said the
woman with hair but no beard. "It's hard to find everything in all
those ashes. We searched for days and couldn't find the sugar bowl."

"Not in front of the baby," Olaf said quickly, and the four pairs of
shoes walked away. Violet and Quigley stayed underneath the car until
Sunny said "Coastkleer," which meant something like, "It's safe to
come out now."

"Those were terrible people," Quigley said with a shudder, brushing
oil and grime off his coat. "They made me feel cold all over."

"They certainly had an aura of menace " Violet agreed in a whisper.
"The feet with the tattoo were Count Olaf, and those glittery shoes
were Esme' Squalor, but who were the other two, Sunny?"

"Unno Narsonist," Sunny murmured. She meant something along the lines
of "I don't know, but they burned down V.F.D. headquarters," and
Violet was quick to explain this to Quigley.

"Klaus has found an important message that survived the fire," Violet
said. "By the time we take you down the waterfall, I'm sure he'll have
decoded the message. Come on."

"Nogo," Sunny said, which meant "I don't think I ought to accompany
you."

"Why on earth not?" Violet asked.

"Unasanc," Sunny said.

"Sunny says that the villains have mentioned one more safe place for
volunteers to gather," Violet explained to Quigley.

"Do you know where it is?" Quigley asked.

Sunny shook her head. "Olafile," she said.

"But if Count Olaf has the Snicket file," Violet said, "how are you
going to find out where this safe place is?"

"Matahari," she said, which meant something like, "If I stay, I can
spy on them and find out."

"Absolutely not," Violet said, after she had translated. "It's not
safe for you to stay here, Sunny. It's bad enough that Olaf has made
you do the cooking."

"Lox," Sunny pointed out.

"But what are you going to make for a False Spring dinner?" Violet
asked.

Sunny gave her sister a smile, and walked over to the trunk of the
car. Violet and Quigley heard her rummaging around among the remaining
groceries, but stayed put so Olaf or any of his associates wouldn't
spot them. When Sunny returned, she had a triumphant smile on her
face, and the frozen hunk of spinach, the large bag of mushrooms, the
can of water chestnuts, and the enormous eggplant in her arms. "False
spring rolls!" she said, which meant something like, "An assortment of
vegetables wrapped in spinach leaves, prepared in honor of False
Spring."

"I'm surprised you can even carry that eggplant, let alone prepare
it," Violet said. "It must weigh as much as you do."

"Suppertunity," Sunny said. She meant something like, "Serving the
troupe dinner will be a perfect chance to listen to their
conversation," and Violet reluctantly translated.

"It sounds dangerous," Quigley said.

"Of course it's dangerous," Violet said. "If she's caught spying, who
knows what they'll do?"

"Ga ga goo goo," Sunny said, which meant "I won't be caught, because
they think I'm only a helpless baby."

"I think your sister is right," Quigley said. "It wouldn't be safe to
carry her down the waterfall, anyway. We need our hands and feet for
the climb. Let Sunny investigate the mystery she's most likely to
solve, while we work on an escape plan."

Violet shook her head. "I don't want to leave my sister behind," she
said. "The Baudelaires should never be separated."

"Separate Klaus," Sunny pointed out.

"If there's another place where volunteers are gathering," Quigley
said, "we need to know where it is. Sunny can find out for us, but
only if she stays here."

"I'm not going to leave my baby sister on top of a mountain," Violet
said.

Sunny dropped her vegetables on the ground and walked over to her
sister and smiled. "I'm not a baby," Sunny said, and hugged her. It
was the longest sentence the youngest Baudelaire had ever said, and as
Violet looked down at her sister, she saw how true it was. Sunny was
not really a baby, not anymore. She was a young girl with unusually
sharp teeth, some impressive cooking skills, and an opportunity to spy
on a group of villains and discover a piece of crucial information.
Sometime, during the unfortunate events that had befallen the three
orphans, Sunny had grown out of her babyhood, and although it made
Violet a bit sad to think about it, it made her proud, too, and she
gave her sister a smile.

"I guess you're right," Violet said. "You're not a baby. But be
careful, Sunny. You're a young girl, but it's still quite dangerous
for a young girl to spy on villains. And remember, we're right at the
bottom of the slope, Sunny. If you need us, just signal again."

Sunny opened her mouth to reply, but before she could utter a sound,
the three children heard a long, lazy hissing noise from underneath
Olaf's car, as if one of Dr. Montgomery's snakes were hiding there.
The car shifted lightly, and Violet pointed to one of Olaf's tires,
which had gone flat. "I must have punctured it," Violet said, "with my
fork-assisted climbing shoes."

"I suppose that's not a nice thing to do," Quigley said, "but I can't
say I'm sorry."

"How's dinner coming along, toothface?" called Count Olaf's cruel
voice over the sound of the wind.

"I guess we'd better leave before we're discovered," Violet said,
giving her sister one more hug and a kiss on the top of her head.
"We'll see you soon, Sunny."

"Good-bye, Sunny," Quigley said. "I'm so glad we finally met in
person. And thank you very much for helping us find the last safe
place."

Sunny Baudelaire looked up at Quigley, and then at her older sister,
and gave them both a big, happy smile that showed all of her
impressive teeth. After spending so much time in the company of
villains, she was happy to be with some people who respected her
skills, appreciated her work, and understood her way of speaking. Even
with Klaus still at the bottom of the waterfall, Sunny felt as if she
had already been happily reunited with her family, and that her time
in the Mortmain Mountains would have a happy ending. She was wrong
about that of course, but for now the youngest Baudelaire smiled up at
these two people who cared about her, one she had just met and one she
had known her entire life, and felt as if she were growing taller at
that very moment.

"Happy," said the young girl, and everyone who heard her knew what she
was talking about.


CHAPTER ELEVEN

If you ever look at a picture of someone who has just had an idea, you
might notice a drawing of a lightbulb over the person's head. Of
course, there is not usually a lightbulb hovering in the air when
someone has an idea, but the image of a lightbulb over someone's head
has become a sort of symbol for thinking, just as the image of the
eye, sadly, has become a symbol for crime and devious behavior rather
than integrity, the prevention of fire, and being well-read.

As Violet and Quigley climbed back down the slippery slope of the
frozen waterfall, their fork-assisted climbing shoes poking into the
ice with each step, they looked down and saw, by the last light of the
setting sun, the figure of Klaus. He was holding a flashlight over his
head to help the two climbers find their way down, but it looked as if
he'd just had an idea.

"He must have found a flashlight in the wreckage," Quigley said. "It
looks like the one Jacques gave me."

"I hope he found enough information to decode Verbal Fridge Dialogue,"
Violet said, and tapped the candelabra below her feet. "Be careful
here, Quigley. The ice feels thin. We'll have to climb around it."

"The ice has been less solid on our way down," Quigley said.

"That's not surprising," Violet said. "We've poked a great deal of it
with forks. By the time False Spring arrives, this whole slope will
probably only be half frozen."

"By the time False Spring arrives," Quigley said, "I hope we'll be on
our way to the last safe place."

"Me, too," Violet said quietly, and the two climbers said no more
until they reached the bottom of the waterfall and walked carefully
across the frozen pool along the path Klaus shone with his flashlight.

"I'm so glad you returned in one piece," Klaus said, shining his
flashlight in the direction of the dining room remains. "It looked
like a very slippery journey. It's getting cold, but if we sit behind
the library entrance, we'll be away from much of the wind."

But Violet was so eager to tell her brother who they had found at the
top of the peak that she could not wait another moment. "It's Sunny,"
she said. "Sunny's at the top. It was her who was signaling us."

"Sunny?" Klaus said, his eyes as wide as his smile. "How did she get
up there? Is she safe? Why didn't you bring her back?"

"She's safe," Violet said. "She's with Count Olaf, but she's safe."

"Has he harmed her?" Klaus asked.

Violet shook her head. "No," she said. "He's making her do all the
cooking and cleaning."

"But she's a baby!" Klaus said.

"Not anymore," Violet said. "We haven't noticed, Klaus, but she's
grown up quite a bit. She's really too young to be in charge of all
the chores, of course, but sometime, during all the hardship we've
been through, she stopped being a baby."

"She's old enough to eavesdrop," Quigley said. "She's already
discovered who burned down the V.F.D. headquarters."

"They're two terrible people, a man and a woman, who have quite an
aura of menace," Violet said. "Even Count Olaf is a little afraid of
them."

"What are they all doing up there?" Klaus asked.

"They're having some sort of villainous meeting," Quigley said. "We
heard them mention something about a recruitment plan, and a large
net."

"That doesn't sound pleasant," Klaus said.

"There's more, Klaus," Violet said. "Count Olaf has the Snicket file,
and he found out about some secret location--the last safe place where
the V.F.D. can gather. That's why Sunny stayed up there. If she
overhears where the place is, we'll know where to go to meet up with
the rest of the volunteers."

"I hope she manages to find out," Klaus said. "Without that piece of
information, all that I've discovered is useless."

"What have you discovered?" Quigley asked.

"I'll show you," Klaus said, and led the way to the ruins of the
library, where Violet could see he'd been working. His dark blue
notebook was open, and she could see that several pages were filled
with notes. Nearby were several half-burnt scraps of paper, stacked
underneath a burnt teacup Klaus was using for a paperweight, and all
of the contents of the refrigerator were laid out in a careful half
circle: the jar of mustard, the container of olives, three jars of
jam, and the very fresh dill. The small glass jug, containing one
pickle, and the bottle of lemon juice were off to one side. "This is
some of the most difficult research I've ever done," Klaus said,
sitting down next to his notebook. "Justice Strauss's legal library
was confusing, and Aunt Josephine's grammatical library was dull, but
the ruined V.F.D. library is a much bigger challenge. Even if I know
what book I'm looking for, it may be nothing but ashes."

"Did you find anything about Verbal Fridge Dialogue?" Quigley asked,
sitting beside him.

"Not at first," Klaus said. "The scrap of paper that led us to the
refrigerator was in a large pile of ashes, and it took awhile to sift
through it. But I finally found one page that was probably from the
same book." He reached for his notebook and held up his flashlight so
he could see the pages. "The page was so delicate," he said, "that I
immediately copied it into my commonplace book. It explains how the
whole code works."

"Read it to us," Violet said, and Klaus complied, a word which here
means "followed Violet's suggestion and read a very complicated
paragraph out loud, explaining it as he went along."

"'Verbal Fridge Dialogue,'" he read, '"is an emergency communication
system that avails itself of the more esoteric products in a
refrigerator. Volunteers will know such a code is being used by the
presence of very fr--'" He looked up from his notebook."The sentence
ends there," he said, "but I assume that 'very fr' is the beginning of
'very fresh dill.' If very fresh dill is in the refrigerator, that
means there's a message there, too."

"I understand that part," Violet said, "but what does 'esoteric'
mean?"

"In this case," Klaus said, "I think it refers to things that aren't
used very much--the things that stay in the refrigerator for a long
time."

"Like mustard and jam and things like that," Violet said. "I
understand."

"'The receiver of the message should find his or her initials, as
noted by one of our poet volunteers, as follows,'" Klaus continued.
"And then there's a short poem: "The darkest of the jams of three
contains within the addressee."

"That's a couplet," Quigley said, "like my sister writes."

"I don't think your sister wrote that particular poem," Violet said.
"This code was probably invented before your sister was born."

"That's what I thought," Klaus said, "but it made me wonder who taught
Isadora about couplets. They might have been a volunteer."

"She had a poetry teacher when we were young," Quigley said, "but I
never met him. I always had cartography class."

"And your mapmaking skills," Violet said, "led us to the
headquarters."

"And your inventing skills," Klaus said, "allowed you to climb up to
Mount Fraught."

"And your researching skills are helping us now," Violet said. "It's
as if we were being trained for all this, and we didn't even know it."

"I never thought of learning about maps as training," Quigley said. "I
just liked it."

"Well, I haven't had much training in poetry," Klaus said, "but the
couplet seems to say that inside the darkest jar of jam is the name of
the person who's supposed to get the message."

Violet looked down at the three jars of jam. "There's apricot,
strawberry, and boysenberry," she said. "Boysenberry's the darkest."

Klaus nodded, and unscrewed the cap from the jar of boysenberry jam.
"Look inside," he said, and shined the flashlight so Violet and
Quigley could see. Someone had taken a knife and written two letters
in the surface of the jam: J and S.

"J.S.," Quigley said. "Jacques Snicket."

"The message can't be for Jacques Snicket " Violet said. "He's dead."

"Maybe whoever wrote this message doesn't know that," Klaus said, and
continued to read from the commonplace book. '"If necessary, the
dialogue uses a cured, fruit-based calendar for days of the week in
order to announce a gathering. Sunday is represented by a lone--' Here
it's cut off again, but I think that means that these olives are an
encoded way of communicating which day of the week a gathering will
take place, with Sunday being one olive, Monday being two, and so on."

"How many olives are in that container?" Quigley asked.

"Five," Klaus said, wrinkling his nose. "I didn't like counting them.
Ever since the Squalors fixed us aqueous martinis, the taste of olives
hasn't really appealed to me."

"Five olives means Thursday," Violet said.

"Today's Friday," Quigley said. "The gathering of the volunteers is
less than a week away.

The two Baudelaires nodded in agreement, and Klaus opened his notebook
again. '"Any spice-based condiment,'" he read, "'should have a coded
label referring volunteers to encoded poems.'"

"I don't think I understand," Quigley said.

Klaus sighed, and reached for the jar of mustard. "This is where it
really gets complicated. Mustard is a spice-based condiment, and
according to the code, it should refer us to a poem of some sort."

"How can mustard refer us to a poem?" Violet asked.

Klaus smiled. "I was puzzled for a long time," he said, "but I finally
thought to look at the list of ingredients. Listen to this: 'Vinegar,
mustard seed, salt, tumeric, the final quatrain of the eleventh stanza
of "The Garden of Proserpine," by Algernon Charles Swinburne, and
calcium disodium, an allegedly natural preservative.' A quatrain is
four lines of a poem, and a stanza is another word for a verse. They
hid a reference to a poem in the list of ingredients."

"It's the perfect place to hide something," Violet said. "No one ever
reads those lists very carefully. But did you find the poem?"

Klaus frowned, and lifted the teacup. "Under a burnt wooden sign
marked 'Poetry,' I found a pile of papers that were burned practically
beyond recognition," he said, "but here's the one surviving scrap, and
it's the last quatrain of the eleventh stanza of 'The Garden of
Proserpine,' by Algernon Charles Swinburne."

"That's convenient," Quigley said.

"A little too convenient," Klaus said. "The entire library was
destroyed, and the one poem that survived is the one we need. It can't
be a coincidence." He held out the scrap of paper so Violet and
Quigley could see it. "It's as if someone knew we'd be looking for
this."

"What does the quatrain say?" Violet asked.

"It's not very cheerful," Klaus said, and tilted the flashlight so he
could read it:

"That no life lives forever; That dead men rise up never; That even
the weariest river Winds somewhere safe to sea."

The children shivered, and moved so they were sitting even closer
together on the ground. It had grown darker, and Klaus's flashlight
was pratically the only thing they could see. If you have ever found
yourself sitting in darkness with a flashlight, you may have
experienced the feeling that something is lurking just beyond the
circle of light that a flashlight makes, and reading a poem about dead
men is not a good way to make yourself feel better.

"I wish Isadora were here," Quigley said. "She could tell us what that
poem means."

"Even the weariest river winds somewhere safe to sea," Violet
repeated. "Do you think that refers to the last safe place?"

"I don't know," Klaus said. "I couldn't find anything else that would
help us."

"What about the lemon juice?" Violet asked. "And the pickle?"

Klaus shook his head, although his sister could scarcely see him in
the dark. "There might be more to the message," he said, "but it's all
gone up in smoke. I couldn't find anything more in the library that
seemed helpful."

Violet took the scrap of paper from her brother and looked at the
quatrain. "There's something very faint here," she said. "Something
written in pencil, but it's too faint to read."

Quigley reached into his backpack. "I forgot we have two flashlights,"
he said, and shone a second light onto the paper. Sure enough, there
was one word, written very faintly in pencil beside the last four
lines of the poem's eleventh stanza. Violet, Klaus, and Quigley leaned
in as far as they could to see what it was. The night winds rustled
the fragile paper, and made the children shiver, shaking the
flashlights, but at last the light shone on the quatrain and they
could see what words were there.

"Sugar bowl," they said in unison, and looked at one another.

"What could that mean?" Klaus asked.

Violet sighed. "When we were hiding underneath the car," she said to
Quigley, "one of those villains said something about searching for a
sugar bowl, remember?"

Quigley nodded, and took out his purple notebook. "Jacques Snicket
mentioned a sugar bowl once," he said, "when we were in Dr.
Montgomery's library. He said it was very important to find it. I
wrote it down on the top of a page in my commonplace book, so I could
add any information I learned about its whereabouts." He held up the
page so the two Baudelaires could see that it was blank. "I never
learned anything more," he said.

Klaus sighed. "It seems that the more we learn, the more mysteries we
find. We reached V.F.D. headquarters and decoded a message, and all we
know is that there's one last safe place, and volunteers are gathering
there on Thursday."

"That might be enough," Violet said, "if Sunny finds out where the
safe place is."

"But how are we going to get Sunny away from Count Olaf?" Klaus asked.

"With your fork-assisted climbing shoes," Quigley said. "We can climb
up there again, and sneak away with Sunny."

Violet shook her head. "The moment they noticed Sunny was gone," she
said, "they would find us. From Mount Fraught, they can see everything
and everyone for miles and miles, and we're hopelessly outnumbered."

"That's true," Quigley admitted. "There are ten villains up there, and
only four of us. Then how are we going to rescue her?"

"Olaf has someone we love," Klaus said thoughtfully. "If we had
something he loves, we could trade it for Sunny's return. What does
Count Olaf love?"

"Money," Violet said.

"Fire," Quigley said.

"We don't have any money," Klaus said, "and Olaf won't trade Sunny for
a fire. There must be something he really loves--something that makes
him happy, and would make him very unhappy if it were taken away."

Violet and Quigley looked at one another and smiled. "Count Olaf loves
Esme' Squalor," Violet said. "If we were holding Esme' prisoner, we
could arrange a trade."

"That's true," Klaus said, "but we're not holding Esme' prisoner."

"We could take her prisoner," Quigley said, and everyone was quiet.
Taking someone prisoner, of course, is a villainous thing to do, and
when you think of doing a villainous thing--even if you have a very
good reason for thinking of doing it--it can make you feel like a
villain, too. Lately, the Baudelaires had been doing things like
wearing disguises and helping burn down a carnival, and were beginning
to feel more and more like villains themselves. But Violet and Klaus
had never done anything as villainous as taking somebody prisoner, and
as they looked at Quigley they could tell that he felt just as
uncomfortable, sitting in the dark and thinking up a villainous plan.

"How would we do it?" Klaus asked quietly.

"We could lure her to us," Violet said, "and trap her."

Quigley wrote something down in his commonplace book. "We could use
the Verdant Flammable Devices," he said. "Esme' thinks they're
cigarettes, and she thinks cigarettes are in. If we lit some of them,
she might smell the smoke and come down here."

"But then what?" Klaus asked.

Violet shivered in the cold, and reached into her pocket. Her fingers
bumped up against the large bread knife, which she had almost
forgotten was there, and then found what she was looking for. She took
the ribbon out of her pocket and tied her hair up, to keep it out of
her eyes. The eldest Baudelaire could scarcely believe she was using
her inventing skills to think up a trap. "The easiest trap to build,"
she said, "is a pit. We could dig a deep hole, and cover it up with
some of this half-burned wood so Esme' couldn't see it. The wood has
been weakened by the fire, so when she steps on it.. ."

Violet did not finish her sentence, but by the glow of the
flashlights, she could see that Klaus and Quigley were both nodding.
"Hunters have used traps like that for centuries," Klaus said, "to
capture wild animals."

"That doesn't make me feel any better," Violet said.

"How could we dig such a pit?" Quigley said.

"Well," Violet said, "we don't really have any tools, so we probably
have to use our hands. As the pit got deeper, we'd have to use
something to carry the dirt away."

"I still have that pitcher," Klaus said.

"And we'd need a way to make sure that we wouldn't get trapped
ourselves," Violet said.

"I have a rope," Quigley said, "in my backpack. We could tie one end
to the archway, and use it to climb out."

Violet reached her hand down to the ground The dirt was very cold, but
quite loose, and she saw that they could dig a pit without too much
trouble. "Is this the right thing to do?" Violet asked. "Do you think
this is what our parents would do?"

"Our parents aren't here," Klaus said. "They might have been here
once, but they're not here now."

The children were quiet again, and tried to think as best they could
in the cold and the dark. Deciding on the right thing to do in a
situation is a bit like deciding on the right thing to wear to a
party. It is easy to decide on what is wrong to wear to a party, such
as deep-sea diving equipment or a pair of large pillows, but deciding
what is right is much trickier. It might seem right to wear a navy
blue suit, for instance, but when you arrive there could be several
other people wearing the same thing, and you could end up being
handcuffed due to a case of mistaken identity. It might seem right to
wear your favorite pair of shoes, but there could be a sudden flood at
the party, and your shoes would be ruined. And it might seem right to
wear a suit of armor to the party, but there could be several other
people wearing the same thing, and you could end up being caught in a
flood due to a case of mistaken identity, and find yourself drifting
out to sea wishing that you were wearing deep-sea diving equipment
after all. The truth is that you can never be sure if you have decided
on the right thing until the party is over, and by then it is too late
to go back and change your mind, which is why the world is filled with
people doing terrible things and wearing ugly clothing, and so few
volunteers who are able to stop them.

"I don't know if it's the right thing to do," Violet said, "but Count
Olaf captured Sunny, and we might have to capture someone ourselves,
in order to stop him."

Klaus nodded solemnly. "We'll fight fire " he said, "with fire."

"Then we'd better get started," Quigley said and stood up. "When the
sun rises, we can light the Verdant Flammable Devices with the mirror
again, like we did when we were signaling Sunny."

"If we want the pit to be ready by dawn," Violet said, "we'll have to
dig all night."

"Where shall we put the pit?" Klaus asked.

"In front of the entrance," Violet decided. "Then we can hide behind
the arch when Esme' approaches."

"How will we know when she's fallen in," Quigley asked, "if we can't
see her?"

"We'll hear it," Violet replied. "We'll hear the breaking of the wood,
and Esme' might scream."

Klaus shuddered. "That's not going to be a pleasant sound."

"We're not in a pleasant situation," Violet said, and the eldest
Baudelaire was right. It was not pleasant to kneel down in front of
the ruined library entrance, and dig through the ashes and dirt with
their bare hands by the light of two flashlights, as all four drafts
of the valley blew around them. It was not pleasant for Violet and her
brother to carry the dirt away in the pitcher, while Quigley tied his
rope to the iron archway, so they could climb in and out as the pit
grew bigger and deeper, like an enormous dark mouth opening wider and
wider to swallow them whole. It was not even pleasant to pause and eat
a carrot to keep up their energy, or to gaze at the shiny white shape
of the frozen waterfall as it glinted in the moonlight, imagining
Esme' Squalor, lured by the smoke of the Verdant Flammable Devices,
approaching the ruined headquarters to become their prisoner. But the
least pleasant part of the situation wasn't the cold dirt, or the
freezing winds, or even their own exhaustion as it grew later and
later and the children dug deeper and deeper. The least pleasant part
was the idea, shared by the two Baudelaires and their new friend, that
they might be doing a villainous thing.

The siblings were not sure if digging a deep pit to trap someone, in
order to trade prisoners with a villain, was something that their
parents or any other volunteers would do, but with so many of the
V.F.D. secrets lost in the ashes, it was impossible to know for sure,
and this uncertainty haunted them with every pitcherful of dirt, and
every climb up the rope, and every piece of weakened wood they laid on
top of the pit to hide it from view.

As the first rays of the morning sun appeared on the misty horizon,
the elder Baudelaires gazed up at the waterfall. At the summit of the
Mortmain Mountains, they knew, was a group of villains, from whom
Sunny was hopefully learning the location of the last safe place. But
as Violet and Klaus lowered their gaze to their own handiwork, and
looked at the dark, deep pit Quigley had helped them dig, they could
not help wondering if there were also a group of villains at the
bottom of the slippery slope. As they looked at the villainous thing
they had made, the three volunteers could not help wondering if they
were villains, too, and this was the least pleasant feeling in the
world.


CHAPTER TWELVE

Not too long ago, in the Swedish city of Stockholm, a group of bank
robbers took a few prisoners during the course of their work. For
several days, the bank robbers and the prisoners lived together in
close proximity, a word which here means "while the police gathered
outside and eventually managed to arrest the robbers and take them to
jail." When the prisoners were finally freed, however, the authorities
discovered that they had become friends with the bank robbers, and
since that time the expression "Stockholm Syndrome" has been used to
describe a situation in which someone becomes friendly with the people
who are holding them prisoner.

There is another expression, however, which describes a situation that
is far more common, when a prisoner does not become friends with such
people, but instead regards them as villains, and despises them more
and more with each passing moment, waiting desperately for an
opportunity to escape. The expression is "Mount Fraught Syndrome," and
Sunny Baudelaire was experiencing it as she stood at the top of Mount
Fraught, gazing down at the frozen waterfall and thinking about her
circumstances.

The young girl had spent another sleepless night in the covered
casserole dish, after washing the salmon out of it with a few handfuls
of melted snow. It was chilly, of course, with the winds of the
Mortmain Mountains blowing through the holes in the lid, and it was
painful, because once again her teeth were chattering in the cold and
giving her tiny cuts on her lips, but there was another reason Sunny
did not sleep well, which is that she was frustrated. Despite her best
spying attempts, the youngest Baudelaire had been unable to eavesdrop
on the villains' conversation and learn the location of the last safe
place where V.F.D. would be gathering, or learn any more about the
dreadful recruitment scheme planned by the man with a beard but no
hair and the woman with hair but no beard. When the troupe gathered
around the flat rock for dinner, they discussed these things, but
every time Sunny tried to get close enough to hear what they were
saying, they glared at her and quickly changed the subject. It seemed
to Sunny that the only thing she had accomplished all evening was
preparing a meal that the troupe enjoyed. When she had presented her
platter of False Spring Rolls, no one had complained, and every single
villainous person had taken second helpings.

But something crucial had escaped the attention of Count Olaf and his
comrades during the meal, and for that Sunny was very grateful. As she
had told her siblings, the youngest Baudelaire had prepared an
assortment of vegetables wrapped in spinach leaves, in honor of False
Spring. Her recipe had required the bag of mushrooms, the can of water
chestnuts, and the frozen hunk of spinach, which she had thawed by
holding it underneath her shirt, as she had when preparing toast
tartar. But Sunny had decided at the last minute that she would not
use the enormous eggplant. When Violet mentioned that the eggplant
must weigh as much as Sunny did, the youngest Baudelaire had an idea,
and rather than chopping the eggplant into small strips with her
teeth, she hid it behind the flat tire of Count Olaf's car, and now,
as the sun rose and the group of villains began their usual morning
bickering, she was retrieving the eggplant and rolling it to the
casserole dish. As she rolled it past the automobile, Sunny looked
down at the frozen waterfall, which was looking less and less frozen
in the morning sun. She knew her siblings were at the bottom with
Quigley, and although she couldn't see them, it made her feel better
knowing they were relatively nearby and that, if her plan worked out,
she would soon be joining them.

"What are you doing, baby?" Sunny had just slipped the eggplant under
the cover of the casserole dish when she heard the voice of one of
Olaf's comrades. The two white-faced women were standing just outside
their tent and stretching in the morning sun.

"Aubergine," Sunny replied, which meant "I've concocted a plan
involving this eggplant, and it doesn't matter if I tell you about it
because you never understand a single word I say."

"More babytalk," said the other white-faced woman with a sigh. "I'm
beginning to think that Sunny is only a helpless baby, and not a spy."

"Goo goo ga--" Sunny began, but the flap of Count Olaf's tent opened
before she could utter the last "ga." The villain and his girlfriend
stood in the morning sun, and it was clear that they expected the new
day--Saturday--to be an important one, because they were dressed for
the occasion, a phrase which here means "wearing such strange clothing
that the youngest Baudelaire was too surprised to say the final 'ga'
she had been planning." Amazingly, it appeared that Count Olaf had
washed his face, and he was wearing a brand-new suit made out of
material that at first seemed to be covered in tiny polka dots. But
when Sunny took a closer look, she saw that each dot was a small eye,
matching Olaf's tattoo and the V.F.D. insignia and all of the other
eyes that had plagued the Baudelaires since that terrible day on the
beach, so that looking at Count Olaf in his new suit felt like looking
at a crowd of villains, all staring at Sunny Baudelaire. But no matter
how unnerving Olaf's fashion choice was, Esme' Squalor's outfit was
worse to behold. Sunny could not remember when she had ever seen a
dress so enormous, and was surprised that such an article of clothing
could have fit in the tent and still leave room for villains to sleep.
The dress was made of layers upon layers of shiny cloth, in different
shades of yellow, orange, and red, all cut in fierce triangular shapes
so that each layer seemed to cut into the next, and rising from the
shoulders of the dress were enormous piles of black lace, sticking up
into the air in strange curves. For a moment, the dress was so huge
and odd that Sunny could not imagine why anyone would wear it, but as
the wicked girlfriend stepped farther out of the tent, it became
horribly clear. Esme' Squalor was dressed to look like an enormous
fire.

"What a wonderful morning!" Count Olaf crowed. "Just think, by the end
of the day I'll have more new members of my troupe than ever before!"

"And we'll need them," Esme' agreed "We're all going to have to work
together for the greater good--burning down the last safe place!"

"Just the idea of the Hotel Denouement in flames makes me so excited,
I'm going to open a bottle of wine!" Count Olaf announced, and Sunny
covered her mouth with her hands so the villains would not hear her
gasp. The Hotel Denouement, she realized, must be the last safe place
for volunteers to gather, and Olaf was so excited that he had uttered
the name inadvertently, a word which here means "where the youngest
Baudelaire could hear it."

"The idea of all those eagles filling the sky makes me so excited, I'm
going to smoke one of those in green cigarettes!" Esme' announced, and
then frowned. "Except I don't have one. Drat."


"Beg your pardon, your Esme'ship," said one of the white-faced women,
"but I see some of that green smoke down at the bottom of the
waterfall."

"Really?" Esme' asked eagerly, and looked in the direction Olaf's
employee was pointing. Sunny looked, too, and saw a familiar plume of
green smoke at the very bottom of the slope, getting bigger and bigger
as the sun continued to rise. The youngest Baudelaire wondered why her
siblings were signaling her, and what they were trying to say.

"That's strange," Olaf said. "You'd think there'd be nothing left of
the headquarters to burn."

"Look how much smoke there is," Esme' said greedily. "There must be a
whole pack of cigarettes down there. This day is getting even better!"

Count Olaf smiled, and then looked away from the waterfall and noticed
Sunny for the first time. "I'll have the baby go down and get them for
you," Count Olaf said.

"Yessir!" Sunny said eagerly.

"The baby would probably steal all the cigarettes for herself," Esme'
said, glaring at the young girl. "I'll go."

"But climbing down there will take hours " Olaf said. "Don't you want
to be here for the recruitment scheme? I just love springing traps on
people."

"Me, too," Esme' agreed, "but don't worry, Olaf. I'll be back in
moments. I'm not going to climb. I'll take one of the toboggans and
sled down the waterfall before anyone else even notices I'm gone."

"Drat!" Sunny couldn't help saying. She meant something along the
lines of, "That is exactly what I was planning on doing," but once
again no one understood.

"Shut up, toothy," Esme' said, "and get out of my way." She flounced
past the youngest Baudelaire, and Sunny realized that there was
something sewn to the bottom of the dress that made it make a
crackling noise as she walked, so that the wicked girlfriend sounded
as much like a fire as she looked like one. Blowing a kiss to Count
Olaf, she grabbed the toboggan belonging to the sinister villains.

"I'll be right back, darling," Esme' said. "Tell that baby to take a
nap so she won't see what we're up to."

"Esme''s right," Olaf said, giving Sunny a cruel smile. "Get in the
casserole dish. You're such an ugly, helpless creature, I can scarcely
stand to look at you."

"You said it, handsome," Esme' said, and chuckled meanly as she sat at
the top of the waterfall. The two white-faced women scurried to help,
and gave the toboggan a big push as Sunny did as she was told, and
disappeared from Olaf's sight.

As you may imagine, the sight of a grown woman in an enormous
flame-imitating dress tobogganing down from the source of the Stricken
Stream to the two tributaries and the half-frozen pool at the bottom
of the waterfall is not the sort of thing to pass unnoticed, even from
far away. Violet was the first to see the colorful blur heading
quickly down the slope, and she lowered Colette's hand mirror, which
she had used once again to catch the rays of the rising sun and
reflect them onto the Verdant Flammable Devices, which she had put in
a pile in front of the pit. Wrinkling her nose from the bitter smell
of the smoke, she turned to Klaus and Quigley, who were putting one
last piece of weakened wood across the pit, so their trap would be
hidden from view.

"Look," Violet said, and pointed to the descending shape.

"Do you think it's Esme'?" Klaus asked.

Violet squinted up at the tobogganing figure. "I think so," she said.
"Nobody but Esme' Squalor would wear an outfit like that."

"We'd better hide behind the archway," Quigley said, "before she spots
us."

The two Baudelaires nodded in agreement, and walked carefully to the
library entrance, making sure to step around the hole they had dug.

"I'm happy that we can't see the pit anymore," Klaus said. "Looking
into that blackness reminded me of that terrible passageway at 667
Dark Avenue."

"First Esme' trapped your siblings there," Violet said to Quigley,
"and then she trapped us."

"And now we're fighting fire with fire, and trapping her," Quigley
said uncomfortably.

"It's best not to think about it," Violet said, although she had not
stopped thinking about the trap since the first handful of ashes and
earth. "Soon we'll have Sunny back, and that's what's important."

"Maybe this is important, too," Klaus said, and pointed up at the
archway. "I never noticed it until now."

Violet and Quigley looked up to see what he was referring to, and saw
four tiny words etched over their heads, right underneath the large
letters spelling "V.F.D. Library."

"'The world is quiet here,'" Quigley read. "What do you think it
means?"

"It looks like a motto," Klaus said. "At Prufrock Preparatory School,
they had a motto carved near the entrance, so everyone would remember
it when they entered the academy."

Violet shook her head. "That's not what I'm thinking of," she said.
"I'm remembering something about that phrase, but just barely."

"The world certainly feels quiet around here," Klaus said. "We haven't
heard a single snow gnat since we arrived."

"The smell of smoke scares them away, remember?" Quigley asked.

"Of course," Klaus said, and peered around the archway to check on
Esme''s progress. The colorful blur was about halfway down the
waterfall, heading straight for the trap they had built. "There's been
so much smoke here at headquarters, the gnats might never come back."

"Without snow gnats," Quigley said, "the salmon of the Stricken Stream
will go hungry. They feed on snow gnats." He reached into his pocket
and opened his commonplace book.

"And without salmon," he said, "the Mortmain Mountain eagles will go
hungry. The destruction of V.F.D, headquarters has caused even more
damage than I thought." Klaus nodded in agreement. "When we were
walking along the Stricken Stream," he said, "the fish were coughing
from all the ashes in the water. Remember, Violet?"

He turned to his sister, but Violet was only half listening. She was
still gazing at the words on the archway, and trying to remember where
she heard them before. "I can just hear those words," she said. "The
world is quiet here. " She closed her eyes. "I think it was a very
long time ago, before you were born, Klaus."

"Maybe someone said them to you," Quigley said.

Violet tried to remember as far back as she could, but everything
seemed as misty as it did in the mountains. She could see the face of
her mother, and her father standing behind her, wearing a suit as
black as the ashes of V.F.D. headquarters. Their mouths were open, but
Violet could not remember what they were saying. No matter how hard
she tried, the memory was as silent as the grave. "Nobody said them to
me," she said finally. "Someone sang them. I think my parents sang the
words 'the world is quiet here' a long time ago, but I don't know
why." She opened her eyes and faced her brother and her friend. "I
think we might be doing the wrong thing," she said.

"But we agreed," Quigley said, "to fight fire with fire."

Violet nodded, and stuck her hands in her pocket, bumping up against
the bread knife again. She thought of the darkness of the pit, and the
scream Esme' would make as she fell into it. "I know we agreed,"
Violet said, "but if V.F.D. really stands for Volunteer Fire
Department, then they're an organization that stops fire. If everyone
fought fire with fire, the entire world would go up in smoke."

"I see what you mean," Quigley said. "If the V.F.D. motto is 'The
world is quiet here,' we ought to be doing something less noisy and
violent than trapping someone, no matter how wicked they are."

"When I was looking into the pit," Klaus said quietly, "I was
remembering something I read in a book by a famous philosopher. He
said, 'Whoever fights monsters should see to it that in the process he
does not become a monster. And when you look long into an abyss, the
abyss also looks into you.'" Klaus looked at his sister, and then at
the sight of Esme' approaching, and then at the weakened wood that the
three children had placed on the ground. "'Abyss' is a fancy word for
'pit,'" he said. "We built an abyss for Esme' to fall into. That's
something a monster might do."

Quigley was copying Klaus's words into his commonplace book. "What
happened to that philosopher?" he asked.

"He's dead," Klaus replied. "I think you're right, Violet. We don't
want to be as villainous and monstrous as Count Olaf."

"But what are we going to do?" Quigley asked. "Sunny is still Olaf's
prisoner, and Esme' will be here at any moment. If we don't think of
the right thing right now, it'll be too late."

As soon as the triplet finished his sentence however, the three
children heard something that made them realize it might already be
too late. From behind the archway, Violet, Klaus, and Quigley heard a
rough, scraping sound as the toboggan reached the bottom of the
waterfall and slid to a halt, and then a triumphant giggle from the
mouth of Esme' Squalor. The three volunteers peeked around the archway
and saw the treacherous girlfriend step off the toboggan with a greedy
smile on her face. But when Esme' adjusted her enormous
flame-imitating dress and took a step toward the smoking Verdant
Flammable Devices, Violet was not looking at her any more. Violet was
looking down at the ground, just a few steps from where she was
standing. Three dark, round masks were sitting in a pile, where
Violet, Klaus, and Quigley had left them upon arriving at the ruins of
headquarters. They had assumed that they would not need them again,
but the eldest Baudelaire realized they had been wrong. As Esme' took
another step closer to the trap, Violet dashed over to the masks, put
one on and stepped out of her hiding place as her brother and her
friend looked on.

"Stop, Esme'!" she cried. "It's a trap!"

Esme' stopped in her tracks and gave Violet a curious look. "Who are
you?" she asked. "You shouldn't sneak up on people like that. It's a
villainous thing to do."

"I'm a volunteer," Violet said.

Esme''s mouth, heavy with orange lipstick that matched her dress,
curled into a sneer. "There are no volunteers here," she said. "The
entire headquarters are destroyed!"

Klaus was the next to grab a mask and confront Olaf's treacherous
romantic companion. "Our headquarters might be destroyed," he said,
"but the V.F.D. is as strong as ever!"

Esme' frowned at the two siblings as if she couldn't decide whether to
be frightened or not "You may be strong," she said nervously, "but
you're also very short." Her dress crackled as she started to take
another step toward the pit. "When I get my hands on you--"

"No!" Quigley cried, and stepped out from the arch wearing his mask,
taking care not to fall into his own trap. "Don't come any closer,
Esme'. If you take another step, you'll fall into our trap."

"You're making that up," Esme' said, but she did not move any closer.
"You're trying to keep all the cigarettes for yourself."

"They're not cigarettes," Klaus said, "and we're not liars. Underneath
the wood you're about to step on is a very deep pit."

Esme' looked at them suspiciously. Gingerly--a word which here means
"without falling into a very deep hole"--she leaned down and moved a
piece of wood aside, and stared down into the trap the children had
built. "Well, well, well," she said. "You did build a trap. I never
would have fallen for it, of course, but I must admit you dug quite a
pit."

"We wanted to trap you," Violet said, "so we could trade you for the
safe return of Sunny Baudelaire. But--"

"But you didn't have the courage to go through with it," Esme' said
with a mocking smile. "You volunteers are never brave enough to do
something for the greater good."

"Throwing people into pits isn't the greater good!" Quigley cried.
"It's villainous treachery!"

"If you weren't such an idiot," Esme' said, "you'd realize that those
things are more or less the same."

"He is not an idiot," Violet said fiercely. She knew, of course, that
it was not worthwhile to get upset over insults from such a ridiculous
person, but she liked Quigley too much to hear him called names. "He
led us here to the headquarters using a map he drew himself."

"He's very well-read," Klaus said.

At Klaus's words, Esme' threw back her head and laughed, shaking the
crackling layers of her enormous dress. "Well-read!" she repeated in a
particularly nasty tone of voice. "Being well-read won't help you in
this world. Many years ago, I was supposed to waste my entire summer
reading Anna Karenina, but I knew that silly book would never help me,
so I threw it into the fireplace." She reached down and picked up a
few more pieces of wood, which she tossed aside with a snicker. "Look
at your precious headquarters, volunteers! It's as ruined as my book.
And look at me! I'm beautiful, fashionable, and I smoke cigarettes!"
She laughed again, and pointed at the children with a scornful finger.
"If you didn't spend all your time with your heads stuck in books,
you'd have that precious baby back."

"We're going to get her back," Violet said firmly.

"Really?" Esme' said mockingly. "And how do you propose to do that?"

"I'm going to talk to Count Olaf," Violet said, "and he's going to
give her back to me."

Esme' threw back her head and started to laugh, but not with as much
enthusiasm as before. "What do you mean?" she said.

"Just what I said," Violet said.

"Hmmm," Esme' said suspiciously. "Let me think for a moment." The evil
girlfriend began to pace back and forth on the frozen pond, her
enormous dress crackling with every step.

Klaus leaned in to whisper to his sister. "What are you doing?" he
asked. "Do you honestly think that we can get Sunny back from Count
Olaf with a simple conversation?"

"I don't know," Violet whispered back, "but it's better than luring
someone into a trap."

"It was wrong to dig that pit," Quigley agreed, "but I'm not sure that
walking straight into Olaf's clutches is the right thing to do,
either."

"It'll take a while to reach Mount Fraught again," Violet said. "We'll
think of something during the climb."

"I hope so," Klaus said, "but if we can't think of something--"

Klaus did not get a chance to say what might happen if they couldn't
think of something because Esme' clapped her hands together to get the
children's attention.

"If you really want to talk to my boyfriend," she said, "I suppose I
can take you to where he is. If you weren't so stupid, you'd know that
he's very nearby."

"We know where he is, Esme'," Klaus said. "He's at the top of the
waterfall, at the source of the Stricken Stream."

"Then I suppose you know how we can get there," Esme' said, and looked
a little foolish. "The toboggan doesn't go uphill, so I actually have
no idea how we can reach the peak."

"She will invent a way," Quigley said, pointing at Violet.

Violet smiled at her friend, grateful for his support, and closed her
eyes underneath her mask. Once more, she was thinking of something she
had heard sung to her, when she was a very little girl. She had
already thought of the way that the three children could take Esme'
with them when they ascended the hill, but thinking of their journey
made her think of a song she had not thought of for many years.
Perhaps when you were very young, someone sang this song to you,
perhaps to lull you to sleep, or to entertain you on a long car trip,
or in order to teach you a secret code. The song is called "The Itsy
Bitsy Spider," and it is one of the saddest songs ever composed. It
tells the story of a small spider who is trying to climb up a water
spout, but every time its climb is half over, there is a great burst
of water, either due to rain or somebody turning the spout on, and at
the end of the song, the spider has decided to try one more time, and
will likely be washed away once again.

Violet Baudelaire could not help feeling like this poor spider as she
ascended the waterfall for the last time, with Quigley and Klaus
beside her and Esme' Squalor on her toboggan behind them. After
attaching the last two forks to Klaus's shoes, she had told her
companions to tie the leather straps of the toboggan around their
waists, so they could drag the villainous girlfriend behind them as
they climbed. It was exhausting to approach the peak of Mount Fraught
in this manner, particularly after staying up all night digging a pit,
and it seemed like they might get washed back down by the dripping
water of the Stricken Stream, like the spider Violet had heard about
when she was a little girl. The ice on the slope was weakening, after
two fork-assisted climbs, a toboggan ride, and the increasing
temperatures of False Spring, and with each step of Violet's
invention, the ice would shift slightly. It was clear that the
slippery slope was almost as exhausted as they were, and soon the ice
would vanish completely. "Mush!" Esme' called from the toboggan. She
was using an expression that arctic explorers shouted to their sled
dogs, and it certainly did not make the journey any easier.

"I wish she'd stop saying that," Violet murmured from behind her mask.
She tapped the candelabra on the ice ahead of her, and a small piece
detached from the waterfall and fell to the ruins of headquarters. She
watched it disappear below her and sighed. She would never see the
V.F.D. headquarters in all its glory. None of the Baudelaires would.
Violet would never know how it felt to cook in the kitchen and gaze at
the two tributaries of the Stricken Stream, while chatting with the
other volunteers. Klaus would never know how it felt to relax in the
library and learn all of the secrets of V.F.D. in the comfort of one
of the library's chairs, with his feet up on one of the matching
V.F.D. footstools. Sunny would never operate the projector in the
movie room, or practice the art of the fake mustache in the disguise
center, or sit in the parlor at tea time and eat the almond cookies
made from my grandmother's recipe. Violet would never study chemical
composition in one of the six laboratories, and Klaus would never use
the balance beams at the gymnasium, and Sunny would never stand behind
the counter at the ice cream shop and prepare butterscotch sundaes for
the swimming coaches when it was her turn. And none of the Baudelaires
would ever meet some of the organization's most beloved volunteers,
including the mechanical instructor C. M. Kornbluth, and Dr. Isaac
Anwhistle, whom everyone called Ike, and the brave volunteer who
tossed the sugar bowl out the kitchen window so it would not be
destroyed in the blaze, and watched it float away on one of the
tributaries of the Stricken Stream. The Baudelaires would never do any
of these things, any more than I will ever see my beloved Beatrice
again, or retrieve my pickle from the refrigerator in which I left it,
and return it to its rightful place in an important coded sandwich.
Violet, of course, was not aware of everything she would never do, but
as she gazed down at the vast, ashen remains of the headquarters, she
felt as if her whole journey in the Mortmain Mountains had been as
useless as the journey of a tiny arachnid in a song she had never
liked to hear.

"Mush!" Esme' cried again, with a cruel chuckle.

"Please stop saying that, Esme'," Violet called down impatiently.
"That mush nonsense is slowing our climb."

"A slow climb might be to our advantage," Klaus murmured to his
sister. "The longer it takes us to reach the summit, the longer we
have to think up what we're going to say to Count Olaf."

"We could tell him that he's surrounded," Quigley said, "and that
there are volunteers everywhere ready to arrest him if he doesn't let
Sunny go free."

Violet shook her mask. "He won't believe that," she said, sticking a
fork-assisted shoe into the waterfall. "He can see everything and
everyone from Mount Fraught. He'll know we're the only volunteers in
the area."

"There must be something we can do," Klaus said. "We didn't make this
journey into the mountains for nothing."

"Of course not," Quigley said. "We found each other, and we solved
some of the mysteries that were haunting us."

"Will that be enough," Violet asked, "to defeat all those villains on
the peak?"

Violet's question was a difficult one, and neither Klaus nor Quigley
had the answer, and so rather than hazard a guess--a phrase which here
means "continue to expend their energy by discussing the matter"--they
decided to hazard their climb, a phrase which here means "continue
their difficult journey in silence, until they arrived at last at the
source of the Stricken Stream." Hoisting themselves up onto the flat
peak, they sat on the edge and pulled the leather straps as hard as
they could. It was such a difficult task to drag Esme' Squalor and the
toboggan over the edge of the slope and onto Mount Fraught that the
children did not notice who was nearby until they heard a familiar
scratchy voice right behind them.

"Who goes there?" Count Olaf demanded.

Breathless from the climb, the three children turned around to see the
villain standing with his two sinister cohorts near his long, black
automobile, glaring suspiciously at the masked volunteers.

"We thought you'd get here by taking the path," said the man with a
beard but no hair, "not by climbing up the waterfall."

"No, no, no," Esme' said quickly. "These aren't the people we're
expecting. These are some volunteers I found at headquarters."

"Volunteers?" said the woman with hair but no beard, but her voice did
not sound as deep as it usually did. The villains gave the children
the same confused frown they had seen from Esme', as if they were
unsure whether to be scared or scornful, and the hookhanded man, the
two white-faced women, and the three former carnival employees
gathered around to see what had made their villainous boss fall
silent. Although they were exhausted, the two Baudelaires hurriedly
untied the straps of the toboggan from their waists and stood with
Quigley to face their enemies. The orphans were very scared, of
course, but they found that with their faces concealed they could
speak their minds, a phrase which here means "confront Count Olaf and
his companions as if they weren't one bit frightened."

"We built a trap to capture your girlfriend, Olaf," Violet said, "but
we didn't want to become a monster like you."

"They're idiotic liars!" Esme' cried. "I found them hogging the
cigarettes, so I captured them myself and made them drag me up the
waterfall like sled dogs."

The middle Baudelaire ignored the wicked girlfriend's nonsense. "We're
here for Sunny Baudelaire," Klaus said, "and we're not leaving without
her."

Count Olaf frowned, and peered at them with his shiny, shiny eyes as
if he were trying to see through their masks. "And what makes you so
certain," he said, "that I'll give you my prisoner just because you
say so?"

Violet thought furiously, looking around at her surroundings for
anything that might give her an idea of what to do. Count Olaf clearly
believed that the three masked people in front of him were members of
V.F.D., and she felt that if she could just find the right words to
say, she could defeat him without becoming as villainous as her
enemies. But she could not find the words, and neither could her
brother nor her friend, who stood beside her in silence. The winds of
the Mortmain Mountains blew against them, and Violet stuck her hands
in her pockets, bumping one finger against the long bread knife. She
began to think that perhaps trapping Esme' had been the right thing to
do after all. Count Olaf's frown began to fade, and his mouth started
to curl upward in a triumphant smile, but just as he opened his mouth
to speak, Violet saw two things that gave her hope once more. The
first was the sight of two notebooks, one a deep shade of purple and
the other dark blue, sticking out of the pockets of her
companions--commonplace books, where Klaus and Quigley had written
down all of the information they had found in the ruined library of
V.F.D. headquarters. And the other was a collection of dishes spread
out on the flat rock that Olaf's troupe had been using for a table.
Sunny had been forced to wash these dishes, using handfuls of melted
snow, and she had laid them out to dry in the sunshine of False
Spring. Violet could see a stack of plates, each emblazoned with the
familiar image of an eye, as well as a row of teacups and a small
pitcher for cream. But there was something missing from the tea set,
and it made Violet smile behind her mask as she turned to face Count
Olaf again.

"You will give us Sunny," she said, "because we know where the sugar
bowl is."


CHAPTER THIRTEEN

Count Olaf gasped, and raised his one eyebrow very high as he gazed at
the two Baudelaires and their companion, his eyes shinier than they
had ever seen them. "Where is it?" he said, in a terrible, wheezing
whisper. "Give it to me!"

Violet shook her head, grateful that her face was still hidden behind
a mask. "Not until you give us Sunny Baudelaire," she said.

"Never!" the villain replied. "Without that big-toothed brat, I'll
never capture the Baudelaire fortune. You give me the sugar bowl this
instant, or I'll throw all of you off this mountain!"

"If you throw us off the mountain," Klaus said, "you'll never know
where the sugar bowl is." He did not add, of course, that the
Baudelaires had no idea where the sugar bowl was, or why in the world
it was so important.

Esme' Squalor took a sinister step toward her boyfriend, her
flame-imitating dress crackling against the cold ground. "We must have
that sugar bowl," she snarled. "Let the baby go. We'll cook up another
scheme to steal the fortune."

"But stealing the fortune is the greater good," Count Olaf said. "We
can't let the baby go."

"Getting the sugar bowl is the greater good," Esme' said, with a
frown.

"Stealing the fortune," Olaf insisted.

"Getting the sugar bowl," Esme' replied.

"Fortune!"

"Sugar bowl!"

"Fortune!"

"Sugar bowl!"

"That's enough!" ordered the man with a beard but no hair. "Our
recruitment scheme is about to be put into action. We can't have you
arguing all day long."

"We wouldn't have argued all day long," Count Olaf said timidly.
"After a few hours--"

"We said that's enough!" ordered the woman with hair but no beard.
"Bring the baby over here!"

"Bring the baby at once!" Count Olaf ordered the two white-faced
women. "She's napping in her casserole dish."

The two white-faced women sighed, but hurried over to the casserole
dish and lifted it together, as if they were cooks removing something
from the oven instead of villainous employees bringing over a
prisoner, while the two sinister visitors reached down the necks of
their shirts and retrieved something that was hanging around their
necks. Violet and Klaus were surprised to see two shiny silver
whistles, like the one Count Olaf had used as part of his disguise at
Prufrock Preparatory School, when he was pretending to be a coach.

"Watch this, volunteers," said the sinister man in his hoarse voice,
and the two mysterious villains blew their whistles. Instantly, the
children heard an enormous rustling sound over their heads, as if the
Mortmain Mountain winds were as frightened as the youngsters, and it
suddenly grew very dim, as if the morning sun had also put on a mask.
But when they looked up, Violet, Klaus, and Quigley saw that the
reason for the noisy sky and the fading light was perhaps more strange
than frightened winds and a masked sun. The sky above Mount Fraught
was swarming with eagles. There were hundreds and hundreds of them,
flying in silent circles high above the two sinister villains. They
must have been nesting nearby to have arrived so quickly, and they
must have been very thoroughly trained to be so eerily silent. Some of
them looked very old, old enough to have been in the skies when the
Baudelaire parents were children themselves. Some of them looked quite
young, as if they had only recently emerged from the egg and were
already obeying the shrill sound of a whistle. But all of them looked
exhausted, as if they would rather be anywhere else but the summit of
the Mortmain Mountains, doing absolutely anything rather than
following the orders of such wretched people.

"Look at these creatures!" cried the woman with hair but no beard.
"When the schism occurred, you may have won the carrier crows,
volunteers, and you may have won the trained reptiles."

"Not anymore," Count Olaf said. "All of the reptiles except one--"

"Don't interrupt," the sinister woman interrupted. "You may have the
carrier crows, but we have the two most powerful mammals in the world
to do our bidding--the lions and eagles!"

"Eagles aren't mammals" Klaus cried out in frustration. "They're
birds!"

"They're slaves," said the man with a beard but no hair, and the two
villains reached into the pockets of their suits and drew out two
long, wicked-looking whips. Violet and Klaus could see at once that
they were similar to the whip Olaf had used when bossing around the
lions at Caligari Carnival. With matching, sinister sneers the two
mysterious villains cracked their whips in the air, and four eagles
swooped down from the sky, landing on the strange thick pads that the
villains had on their shoulders.

"These beasts will do anything we tell them to do," the woman said.
"And today they're going to help us with our greatest triumph." She
uncurled the whip and gestured to the ground around her, and the
children noticed for the first time an enormous net on the ground,
spread out over almost the entire peak and just stopping at their
fork-assisted climbing shoes. "On my signal, these eagles will lift
this net from the ground and carry it into the sky, capturing a group
of young people who think they're here to celebrate False Spring."

"The Snow Scouts," Violet said in astonishment.

"We'll capture every one of those uniformed brats," the villainous man
bragged, "and each one of them will be offered the exciting
opportunity to join us."

"They'll never join you," Klaus said.

"Of course they will," said the sinister woman, in her deep, deep
voice. "They'll either be recruited, or they'll be our prisoners. But
one thing is for certain--we'll burn down every single one of their
parents' homes."

The two Baudelaires shuddered, and even Count Olaf looked a bit
uneasy. "Of course," he said quickly, "the main reason we're doing all
this is to get our hands on all those fortunes."

"Of course," Esme' said with a nervous snicker. "We'll have the Spats
fortune, the Kornbluth fortune, the Winnipeg fortune, and many others.
I'll be able to afford the penthouse apartment of every single
building that isn't on fire!"

"Once you tell us where the sugar bowl is," said the man with a beard
but no hair, "you can leave, volunteers, and take your baby friend
with you. But wouldn't you rather join us?"

"No, thank you," Quigley said. "We're not interested."

"It doesn't matter if you're interested or not," said the woman with
hair but no beard. "Look around you. You're hopelessly outnumbered.
Wherever we go, we find new comrades who are eager to assist us in our
work."

"We have comrades, too," Violet said bravely. "As soon as we rescue
Sunny, we're going to meet up with the other volunteers at the last
safe place, and tell them about your terrible scheme!"

"It's too late for that, volunteers," said Count Olaf in triumph.
"Here come my new recruits!"

With a horrible laugh, the villain pointed in the direction of the
rocky path, and the elder Baudelaires could see, past the covered
casserole dish still held by the white-faced women, the arrival of the
uniformed Snow Scouts, walking in two neat lines, more like eggs in a
carton than young people on a hike. Apparently, the scouts had
realized that the snow gnats were absent from this part of the
Mortmain Mountains and had removed their masks, so Violet and Klaus
could instantly spot Carmelita Spats, standing at the front of one of
the lines with a tiara on her head--"tiara" is a word which here means
"small crown given to a nasty little girl for no good reason"--and a
large smirk on her face. Beside her, at the head of the other line,
stood Bruce, holding the Springpole in one hand and a big cigar in the
other. There was something about his face that Violet and Klaus found
familiar, but they were too concerned about the villainous recruitment
plan to give it much thought.

"What are all you cakesniffers doing here?" demanded Carmelita, in an
obnoxious voice the two siblings found equally familiar. "I'm the
False Spring Queen, and I order you to go away!"

"Now, now, Carmelita," Bruce said. "I'm sure these people are here to
help celebrate your special day. Let's try to be accommodating. In
fact we should try to be accommodating, basic, calm, darling--"

The scouts had begun to say the ridiculous pledge along with Bruce,
but the two Baudelaires knew they could not wait for the entire
alphabetical list to be recited.

"Bruce," Violet interrupted quickly, "these people are not here to
help you celebrate False Spring. They're here to kidnap all of the
Snow Scouts."

"What?" Bruce asked with a smile, as if the eldest Baudelaire might
have been joking.

"It's a trap," Klaus said. "Please, turn around and lead the scouts
away from here."

"Pay no attention to these three masked idiots," Count Olaf said
quickly. "The mountain air has gone to their heads. Just take a few
steps closer and we'll all join in a special celebration."

"We're happy to accommodate," Bruce said. "After all, we're
accommodating, basic--"

"No!" Violet cried. "Don't you see the net on the ground? Don't you
see the eagles in the sky?"

"The net is decoration," Esme' said, with a smile as false as the
Spring, "and the eagles are wildlife."

"Please listen to us!" Klaus said. "You're in terrible danger!"

Carmelita glared at the two Baudelaires, and adjusted her tiara. "Why
should I listen to cakesniffing strangers like you?" she asked.
"You're so stupid that you've still got your masks on, even though
there aren't any snow gnats around here."

Violet and Klaus looked at one another through their masks.
Carmelita's response had been quite rude, but the two siblings had to
admit she had a point. The Baudelaires were unlikely to convince
anyone that they were telling the truth while their faces were
unnecessarily covered. They did not want to sacrifice their disguises
and reveal their true identities to Count Olaf and his troupe, but
they couldn't risk the kidnapping of all the Snow Scouts, even to save
their sister. The two Baudelaires nodded at one another, and then
turned to see that Quigley was nodding, too, and the three children
reached up and took off their masks for the greater good.

Count Olaf's mouth dropped open in surprise. "You're dead!" he said to
the eldest Baudelaire, saying something that he knew full well was
ridiculous. "You perished in the caravan, along with Klaus!"

Esme' stared at Klaus, looking just as astonished as her boyfriend.
"You're dead, too!" she cried. "You fell off a mountain!"

"And you're one of those twins!" Olaf said to Quigley. "You died a
long time ago!"

"I'm not a twin," Quigley said, "and I'm not dead."

"And," Count Olaf said with a sneer, "you're not a volunteer. None of
you are members of V.F.D. You're just a bunch of orphan brats."

"In that case," said the woman with hair but no beard, in her deep,
deep voice, "there's no reason to worry about that stupid baby any
longer."

"That's true," Olaf said, and turned to the white-faced women. "Throw
the baby off the mountain!" he ordered.

Violet and Klaus cried out in horror, but the two white-faced women
merely looked at the covered casserole dish they were holding, and
then at one another. Then, slowly, they looked at Count Olaf, but
neither of them moved an inch.

"Didn't you hear me?" Olaf asked. "Throw that baby off this mountain!"

"No," said one of the white-faced women, and the two Baudelaires
turned to them in relief.

"No?" asked Esme' Squalor in an astonished voice. "What do you mean,
no?"

"We mean no," said the white-faced woman, and her companion nodded.
Together they put the covered casserole dish down on the ground in
front of them. Violet and Klaus were surprised to see that the dish
did not move, and assumed that their sister must have been too scared
to come out.

"We don't want to participate in your schemes anymore," said the other
white-faced woman, and sighed. "For a while, it was fun to fight fire
with fire, but we've seen enough flames and smoke to last our whole
lives."

"We don't think that it was a coincidence that our home burned to the
ground," said the first woman. "We lost a sibling in that fire, Olaf."

Count Olaf pointed at the two women with a long, bony finger. "Obey my
orders this instant!" he screamed, but his two former accomplices
merely shook their heads, turned away from the villain, and began to
walk away. Everyone on the square peak watched in silence as the two
white-faced women walked past Count Olaf, past Esme' Squalor, past the
two sinister villains with eagles on their shoulders, past the two
Baudelaires and Quigley Quagmire, past the hook-handed man and the
former employees of the carnival, and finally past Bruce and Carmelita
Spats and the rest of the Snow Scouts, until they reached the rocky
path and began to walk away from Mount Fraught altogether. Count Olaf
opened his mouth and let out a terrible roar, and jumped up and down
on the net.

"You can't walk away from me, you pasty-faced women!" he cried. "I'll
find you and destroy you myself! In fact, I can do anything myself!
I'm an individual practitioner, and I don't need anybody's help to
throw this baby off the mountain!" With a nasty chuckle, he picked up
the covered casserole dish, staggering slightly, and walked to the
edge of the half-frozen waterfall.

"No!" Violet cried.

"Sunny!" Klaus screamed.

"Say good-bye to your baby sister, Baudelaires!" Count Olaf said, with
a triumphant smile that showed all of his filthy teeth.

"I'm not a baby!" cried a familiar voice from under the villain's
long, black automobile, and the two elder Baudelaires watched with
pride and relief as Sunny emerged from behind the tire Violet had
punctured, and ran to hug her siblings. Klaus had to take his glasses
off to wipe the tears from his eyes as he was finally reunited with
the young girl who was his sister. "I'm not a baby!" Sunny said again,
turning to Olaf in triumph.

"How could this be?" Count Olaf said, but when he removed the cover
from the casserole dish, he saw how this could be, because the object
inside, which was about the same size and weight as the youngest
Baudelaire, wasn't a baby either.

"Babganoush!" Sunny cried, which meant something along the lines of,
"I concocted an escape plan with the eggplant that turned out to be
even handier than I thought," but there was no need for anyone to
translate, as the large vegetable slid out of the casserole dish and
landed with a plop! at Olaf's feet.

"Nothing is going right for me today!" cried the villain. "I'm
beginning to think that washing my face was a complete waste of time!"

"Don't upset yourself, boss," said Colette, contorting herself in
concern. "I'm sure that Sunny will cook us something delicious with
the eggplant."

"That's true," the hook-handed man said. "She's becoming quite a cook.
The False Spring Rolls were quite tasty, and the lox was delicious."

"It could have used a little dill, in my opinion," Hugo said, but the
three reunited Baudelaires turned away from this ridiculous
conversation to face the Snow Scouts.

"Now do you believe us?" Violet asked Bruce. "Can't you see that this
man is a terrible villain who is trying to do you harm?"

"Don't you remember us?" Klaus asked Carmelita Spats. "Count Olaf had
a terrible scheme at Prufrock Prep, and he has a terrible scheme now!"

"Of course I remember you," Carmelita said. "You're those cakesniffing
orphans who caused Vice Principal Nero all that trouble. And now
you're trying to ruin my very special day! Give me that Springpole,
Uncle Bruce!"

"Now, now, Carmelita," Bruce said, but Carmelita had already grabbed
the long pole from Bruce's hands and was marching across the net
toward the source of the Stricken Stream. The man with a beard but no
hair and the woman with hair but no beard clasped their wicked whips
and raised their shiny whistles to their sinister mouths, but the
Baudelaires could see they were waiting to spring their trap until the
rest of the scouts stepped forward, so they would be inside the net
when the eagles lifted it from the ground.

"I crown myself False Spring Queen!" Carmelita announced, when she
reached the very edge of Mount Fraught. With a nasty laugh of triumph,
she elbowed the Baudelaires aside and drove the Springpole into the
half-frozen top of the waterfall. There was a slow, loud shattering
sound, and the Baudelaires looked down the slope and saw that an
enormous crack was slowly making its way down the center of the
waterfall, toward the pool and the two tributaries of the Stricken
Stream. The Baudelaires gasped in horror. Although it was only the ice
that was cracking, it looked as if the mountain were beginning to
split in half, and that soon an enormous schism would divide the
entire world.

"What are you looking at?" Carmelita asked scornfully. "Everybody's
supposed to be doing a dance in my honor."

"That's right," Count Olaf said, "why doesn't everybody step forward
and do a dance in honor of this darling little girl?"

"Sounds good to me," Kevin said, leading his fellow employees onto the
net. "After all, I have two equally strong feet."

"And we should try to be accommodating," the hook-handed man said.
"Isn't that what you said, Uncle Bruce?"

"Absolutely," Bruce agreed, with a puff on his cigar. He looked a bit
relieved that all the arguing had ceased, and that the scouts finally
had an opportunity to do the same thing they did every year. "Come on,
Snow Scouts, let's recite the Snow Scout Alphabet Pledge as we dance
around the Springpole."

The scouts cheered and followed Bruce onto the net. "Snow Scouts," the
Snow Scouts said, "are accommodating, basic, calm, darling,
emblematic, frisky, grinning, human, innocent, jumping, kept, limited,
meek, nap-loving, official, pretty, quarantined, recent, scheduled,
tidy, understandable, victorious, wholesome, xylophone, young, and
zippered, every morning, every afternoon, every night, and all day
long!"

There is nothing wrong, of course, with having a pledge, and putting
into words what you might feel is important in your life as a reminder
to yourself as you make your way in the world. If you feel, for
instance, that well-read people are less likely to be evil, and a
world full of people sitting quietly with good books in their hands is
preferable to a world filled with schisms and sirens and other noisy
and troublesome things, then every time you enter a library you might
say to yourself, "The world is quiet here," as a sort of pledge
proclaiming reading to be the greater good. If you feel that well-read
people ought to be lit on fire and their fortunes stolen, you might
adopt the saying "Fight fire with fire!" as your pledge, whenever you
ordered one of your comrades around. But whatever words you might
choose to describe your own life, there are two basic guidelines for
composing a good pledge. One guideline is that the pledge make good
sense, so that if your pledge contains the word "xylophone," for
example, you mean that a percussion instrument played with mallets is
very important to you, and not that you simply couldn't think of a
good word that begins with the letter X. The other guideline is that
the pledge be relatively short, so if a group of villains is luring
you into a trap with a net and a group of exhausted trained eagles,
you'll have more time to escape.

The Snow Scout Alphabet Pledge, sadly, did not follow either of these
guidelines. As the Snow Scouts promised to be "xylophone," the man
with a beard but no hair cracked his whip in the air, and the eagles
sitting on both villains' shoulders began to flap their wings and,
digging their claws into the thick pads, lifted the two sinister
people high in the air, and when the pledge neared its end, and the
Snow Scouts were all taking a big breath to make the snowy sound, the
woman with hair but no beard blew her whistle, making a loud shriek
the Baudelaires remembered from running laps as part of Olaf's scheme
at Prufrock Prep. The three siblings stood with Quigley and watched as
the rest of the eagles quickly dove to the ground, picked up the net,
and, their wings trembling with the effort, lifted everyone who was
standing on it into the air, the way you might remove all the dinner
dishes from the table by lifting all the corners of the tablecloth. If
you were to try such an unusual method of clearing the table, you
would likely be sent to your room or chased out of the restaurant, and
the results on Mount Fraught were equally disastrous. In moments, all
of the Snow Scouts and Olaf's henchfolk were in an aerial heap,
struggling together inside the net that the eagles were holding. The
only person who escaped recruitment--besides the Baudelaires and
Quigley Quagmire, of course--was Carmelita Spats, standing next to
Count Olaf and his girlfriend.

"What's going on?" Bruce asked Count Olaf from inside the net. "What
have you done?"

"I've triumphed," Count Olaf said, "again. A long time ago, I tricked
you out of a reptile collection that I needed for my own use." The
Baudelaires looked at one another in astonishment, suddenly realizing
when they had met Bruce before. "And now, I've tricked you out of a
collection of children!"

"What's going to happen to us?" asked one of the Snow Scouts
fearfully.

"I don't care," said another Snow Scout, who seemed to be afflicted
with Stockholm Syndrome already. "Every year we hike up to Mount
Fraught and do the same thing. At least this year is a little
different!"

"Why are you recruiting me, too?" asked the hook-handed man, and the
Baudelaires could see one of his hooks frantically sticking out of the
net. "I already work for you."

"Don't worry, hooky," Esme' replied mockingly. "It's all for the
greater good!"

"Mush!" cried the man with a beard but no hair, cracking his whip in
the air. Squawking in fear, the eagles began to drag the net across
the sky, away from Mount Fraught.

"You get the sugar bowl from those bratty orphans, Olaf," ordered the
woman with hair but no beard, "and we'll all meet up at the last safe
place!"

"With these eagles at our disposal," the sinister man said in his
hoarse voice, "we can finally catch up to that self-sustaining hot air
mobile home and destroy those volunteers!"

The Baudelaires gasped, and shared an astonished look with Quigley.
The villain was surely talking about the device that Hector had built
at the Village of Fowl Devotees, in which Duncan and Isadora had
escaped.

"We'll fight fire with fire!" the woman with hair but no beard cried
in triumph, and the eagles carried her away. Count Olaf muttered
something to himself and then turned and began creeping toward the
Baudelaires. "I only need one of you to learn where the sugar bowl
is," he said, his eyes shining brightly, "and to get my hands on the
fortune. But which one should it be?"

"That's a difficult decision," Esme' said. "On one hand, it's been
enjoyable having an infant servant. But it would be a lot of fun to
smash Klaus's glasses and watch him bump into things."

"But Violet has the longest hair," Carmelita volunteered, as the
Baudelaires backed toward the cracked waterfall with Quigley right
behind them. "You could yank on it all the time, and tie it to things
when you were bored."

"Those are both excellent ideas," Count Olaf said. "I'd forgotten what
an adorable little girl you are. Why don't you join us?"

"Join you?" Carmelita asked.

"Look at my stylish dress," Esme' said to Carmelita. "If you joined
us, I'd buy you all sorts of in outfits."

Carmelita looked thoughtful, gazing first at the children, and then at
the two villains standing next to her and smiling. The three
Baudelaires shared a look of horrified disappointment with Quigley.
The siblings remembered how monstrous Carmelita had been at school,
but it had never occurred to them that she would be interested in
joining up with even more monstrous people.

"Don't believe them, Carmelita," Quigley said, and took his purple
notebook out of his pocket. "They'll burn your parents' house down. I
have the evidence right here, in my commonplace book."

"What are you going to believe, Carmelita?" Count Olaf asked. "A silly
book, or something an adult tells you?"

"Look at us, you adorable little girl," Esme' said, her yellow,
orange, and red dress crackling on the ground. "Do we look like the
sort of people who like to burn down houses?"

"Carmelita!" Violet cried. "Don't listen to them!"

"Carmelita!" Klaus cried. "Don't join them!"

"Carmelita!" Sunny cried, which meant something like, "You're making a
monstrous decision!"

"Carmelita," Count Olaf said, in a sickeningly sweet voice. "Why don't
you choose one orphan to live, and push the others off the cliff, and
then we'll all go to a nice hotel together."

"You'll be like the daughter we never had," Esme' said, stroking her
tiara.

"Or something," added Olaf, who looked like he would prefer having
another employee rather than a daughter.

Carmelita glanced once more at the Baudelaires, and then smiled up at
the two villains. "Do you really think I'm adorable?" she asked.

"I think you're adorable, beautiful, cute, dainty, eye-pleasing,
flawless, gorgeous, harmonious, impeccable, jaw-droppingly adorable,
keen, luscious, magnificent, nifty, obviously adorable, photogenic,
quite adorable, ravishing, splendid, thin, undeformed, very adorable,
well-proportioned, xylophone, yummy, and zestfully adorable," Esme'
pledged, "every morning, every afternoon, every night, and all day
long!"

"Don't listen to her!" Quigley pleaded. "A person can't be
'xylophone'!"

"I don't care!" Carmelita said. "I'm going to push these cakesniffers
off the mountain, and start an exciting and fashionable new life!"

The Baudelaires took another step back, and Quigley followed, giving
the children a panicked look. Above them they could hear the squawking
of the eagles as they took the villains' new recruits farther and
farther away. Behind them they could feel the four drafts of the
valley below, where the headquarters had been destroyed by people the
children's parents had devoted their lives to stopping. Violet reached
in her pocket for her ribbon, trying to imagine what she could invent
that could get them away from such villainous people, and journeying
toward their fellow volunteers at the last safe place. Her fingers
brushed against the bread knife, and she wondered if she should remove
the weapon from her pocket and use it to threaten the villains with
violence, or hether this, too, would make her as villainous as the man
who was staring at her now.

"Poor Baudelaires," Count Olaf said mockingly. "You might as well give
up. You're hopelessly outnumbered."

"We're not outnumbered at all," Klaus said. "There are four of us, and
only three of you."

"I count triple because I'm the False Spring Queen," Carmelita said,
"so you are outnumbered, cakesniffers."

This, of course, was more utter nonsense from the mouth of this cruel
girl, but even if it weren't nonsense, it does not always matter if
one is outnumbered or not. When Violet and Klaus were hiking toward
the Valley of Four Drafts, for instance, they were outnumbered by the
swarm of snow gnats, but they managed to find Quigley Quagmire, climb
up the Vertical Flame Diversion to the headquarters, and find the
message hidden in the refrigerator. Sunny had been outnumbered by all
of the villains on top of Mount Fraught, and had still managed to
survive the experience, discover the location of the last safe place,
and concoct a few recipes that were as easy as they were delicious.
And the members of V.F.D. have always been outnumbered, because the
number of greedy and wicked people always seems to be increasing,
while more and more libraries go up in smoke, but the volunteers have
managed to endure, a word which here means "meet in secret,
communicate in code, and gather crucial evidence to foil the schemes
of their enemies." It does not always matter whether there are more
people on your side of the schism than there are on the opposite side,
and as the Baudelaires stood with Quigley and took one more step back,
they knew what was more important.

"Rosebud!'' Sunny cried, which meant "In some situations, the location
of a certain object can be much more important than being
outnumbered," and it was true. As the villains gasped in astonishment,
Violet sat down in the toboggan, grabbing the leather straps. Quigley
sat down behind her and put his arms around her waist, and Klaus sat
down next, and put his arms around Quigley's, and there was just
enough room in back for a young girl, so Sunny sat behind her brother
and hung on tight as Violet pushed off from the peak of Mount Fraught
and sent the four children hurtling down the slope. It did not matter
that they were outnumbered. It only mattered that they could escape
from a monstrous end by racing down the last of the slippery slope,
just as it only matters for you to escape from a monstrous end by
putting down the last of The Slippery Slope, and reading a book in
which villains do not roar at children who are trying to escape.

"We'll be right behind you, Baudelaires!" Count Olaf roared, as the
toboggan racedtoward the Valley of Four Drafts, bumping and splashing
against the cracked and melting ice.

"He won't be right behind us," Violet said. "My shoes punctured his
tire, remember?"

Quigley nodded. "And he'll have to take that path," he said. "A car
can't go down a waterfall."

"We'll have a head start," Violet said. "Maybe we can reach the last
safe place before he does."

"Overhear!" Sunny cried. "Hotel Denouement!"

"Good work, Sunny!" Violet said proudly, pulling on the leather straps
to steer the toboggan away from the large crack. "I knew you'd be a
good spy."

"Hotel Denouement," Quigley said. "I think I have that in one of my
maps. I'll check my commonplace book when we get to the bottom."

"Bruce!" Sunny cried.

"That's another thing to write down in our commonplace books," Klaus
agreed. "That man Bruce was at Dr. Montgomery's house at the end of
our stay. He said he was packing up Monty's reptile collection for the
herpetological society."

"Do you think he's really a member of V.F.D.?" Violet asked.

"We can't be sure," Quigley said. "We've managed to investigate so
many mysteries, and yet there's still so much we don't know." He
sighed thoughtfully, and gazed down at the ruins of headquarters
rushing toward them. "My siblings--"

But the Baudelaires never got to hear any more about Quigley's
siblings, because at that moment the toboggan, despite Violet's
efforts with the leather straps, slipped against a melted section of
the waterfall, and the large sled began to spin. The children
screamed, and Violet grabbed the straps as hard as she could, only to
have them break in her hands. "The steering mechanism is broken!" she
yelled. "Dragging Esme' Squalor up the slope must have weakened the
straps!"

"Uh-oh!" Sunny cried, which meant something along the lines of, "That
doesn't sound like good news."

"At this velocity," Violet said, using a scientific word for speed,
"the toboggan won't stop when we reach the frozen pool. If we don't
slow down, we'll fall right into the pit we dug."

Klaus was getting dizzy from all the spinning, and closed his eyes
behind his glasses. "What can we do?" he asked.

"Drag your shoes against the ice!" Violet cried. "The forks should
slow us down!"

Quickly, the two elder Baudelaires stretched out their legs and
dragged the forks of their shoes against the last of the ice on the
slope. Quigley followed suit, but Sunny, who of course was not wearing
fork-assisted climbing shoes, could do nothing but listen to the
scraping and splashing of the forks against the thawing ice of the
stream as the toboggan slowed ever so slightly.

"It's not enough!" Klaus cried. As the toboggan continued to spin, he
caught brief glimpses of the pit they had dug, covered with a thin
layer of weakened wood, getting closer and closer as the four children
hurtled toward the bottom of the waterfall.

"Bicuspid?" Sunny asked, which meant something like "Should I drag my
teeth against the ice, too?"

"It's worth a try," Klaus said, but as soon as the youngest Baudelaire
leaned down and dragged her teeth along the thawing waterfall, the
Baudelaires could see at once that it was not really worth a try at
all, as the toboggan kept spinning and racing toward the bottom.

"That's not enough, either," Violet said, and focused her inventing
mind as hard as she could, remembering how she had stopped the
caravan, when she and her brother were hurtling away from Count Olaf's
automobile. There was nothing large enough to use as a drag chute, and
the eldest Baudelaire found herself wishing that Esme' Squalor were on
board with them, so she could stop the toboggan with her enormous,
flame-imitating dress. She knew there was no blackstrap molasses, wild
clover honey, corn syrup, aged balsamic vinegar, apple butter,
strawberry jam, caramel sauce, maple syrup, butterscotch topping,
maraschino liqueur, virgin and extra-virgin olive oil, lemon curd,
dried apricots, mango chutney, crema di noci, tamarind paste, hot
mustard, marshmallows, creamed corn, peanut butter, grape preserves,
salt water taffy, condensed milk, pumpkin pie filling, or glue on
board, or any other sticky substance, for that matter. But then she
remembered the small table she had used to drag on the ground, behind
the caravan, and she reached into her pocket and knew what she could.

"Hang on!" Violet cried, but she did not hang on herself. Dropping the
broken straps of the toboggan, she grabbed the long bread knife and
took it out of her pocket at last. It had only been several days, but
it felt like a very long time since she had taken the knife from the
caravan, and it seemed that every few minutes she had felt its jagged
blade in her pocket as she tried to defeat the villains high above
her, without becoming a villain herself. But now, at last, there was
something she could do with the knife that might save them all,
without hurting anyone. Gritting her teeth, Violet leaned out of the
spinning toboggan and thrust the knife as hard as she could into the
ice of the slippery slope.

The tip of the blade hit the crack caused by Carmelita's Springpole,
and then the entire knife sank into the slope just as the toboggan
reached the bottom. There was a sound the likes of which the
Baudelaires had never heard, like a combination of an enormous window
shattering and the deep, booming sound of someone firing a cannon. The
knife had widened the crack, and in one tremendous crash, the last of
the ice fell to pieces and all of the forks, sunlight, teeth, and
tobogganing finally took their toll on the waterfall. In one enormous
whoosh!, the waters of the Stricken Stream came rushing down the
slope, and in a moment the Baudelaires were no longer on a frozen pool
at the bottom of a strange curve of ice, but simply at the bottom of a
rushing waterfall, with gallons and gallons of water pouring down on
them. The orphans had just enough time to take a deep breath before
the toboggan was forced underwater. The three siblings hung on tight,
but the eldest Baudelaire felt a pair of hands slip from her waist,
and when the wooden toboggan bobbed to the surface again, she called
out the name of her lost friend.

"Quigley!" she screamed.

"Violet!" The Baudelaires heard the triplet's voice as the toboggan
began to float down one of the tributaries. Klaus pointed, and through
the rush of the waterfall the children could see a glimpse of their
friend. He had managed to grab onto a piece of wood from the ruins of
headquarters, something that looked a bit like a banister, such as one
might need to walk up a narrow staircase leading to an astronomical
observatory. The rush of the water was dragging the wood, and Quigley,
down the opposite tributary of the Stricken Stream.

"Quigley!" Violet screamed again.

"Violet!" Quigley shouted, over the roar of the water. The siblings
could see he had removed his commonplace book from his pocket and was
desperately waving it at them. "Wait for me! Wait for me at--"

But the Baudelaires heard no more. The Stricken Stream, in its sudden
thaw from the arrival of False Spring, whisked the banister and the
toboggan away from one another, down the two separate tributaries. The
siblings had one last glimpse of the notebook's dark purple cover
before Quigley rushed around one twist in the stream, and the
Baudelaires rushed around another, and the triplet was gone from their
sight.

"Quigley!" Violet called, one more time, and tears sprung in her eyes.

"He's alive," Klaus said, and held Violet's shoulder to help her
balance on the bobbing toboggan. She could not tell if the middle
Baudelaire was crying, too, or if his face was just wet from the
waterfall. "He's alive, and that's the important thing."

"Intrepid," Sunny said, which meant something like, "Quigley Quagmire
was brave and resourceful enough to survive the fire that destroyed
his home, and I'm sure he'll survive this, too."

Violet could not bear that her friend was rushing away from her, so
soon after first making his acquaintance. "But we're supposed to wait
for him," she said, "and we don't know where."

"Maybe he's going to try to reach his siblings before the eagles do,"
Klaus said, "but we don't know where they are."

"Hotel Denouement?" Sunny guessed. "V.F.D.?"

"Klaus," Violet said, "you saw some of Quigley's research. Do you know
if these two tributaries ever meet up again?"

Klaus shook his head. "I don't know," he said. "Quigley's the
cartographer."

"Godot," Sunny said, which meant "We don't know where to go, and we
don't know how to get there."

"We know some things," Klaus said. "We know that someone sent a
message to J.S."

"Jacques," Sunny said.

Klaus nodded. "And we know that the message said to meet on Thursday
at the last safe place."

"Matahari," Sunny said, and Klaus smiled, and pulled Sunny toward him
so she wouldn't fall off the floating toboggan. She was no longer a
baby, but the youngest Baudelaire was still young enough to sit on her
brother's lap.

"Yes," Klaus agreed. "Thanks to you, we know that the last safe place
is the Hotel Denouement."

"But we don't know where that is," Violet said. "We don't know where
to find these volunteers, or if indeed there are any more surviving
members of V.F.D. We can't even be certain what V.F.D. stands for, or
if our parents are truly dead. Quigley was right. We've managed to
investigate so many mysteries, and yet there's still so much we don't
know."

Her siblings nodded sadly, and if I had been there at that moment,
instead of arriving far too late to see the Baudelaires, I would have
nodded, too. Even for an author like myself, who has dedicated his
entire life to investigating the mysteries that surround the
Baudelaire case, there is still much I have been unable to discover. I
do not know, for instance, what happened to the two white-faced women
who decided to quit Olaf's troupe and walk away, all by themselves,
down the Mortmain Mountains. There are some who say that they still
paint their faces white, and can be seen singing sad songs in some of
the gloomiest music halls in the city. There are some who say that
they live together in the hinterlands, attempting to grow rhubarb in
the dry and barren ground. And there are those who say that they did
not survive the trip down from Mount Fraught, and that their bones can
be found in one of the many caves in the odd, square peaks. But
although I have sat through song after dreary song, and tasted some of
the worst rhubarb in my life, and brought bone after bone to a
skeleton expert until she told me that I was making her so miserable
that I should never return, I have not been able to discover what
truly happened to the two women. I do not know where the remains of
the caravan are, as I have told you, and as I reach the end of the
rhyming dictionary, and read the short list of words that rhyme with
"zucchini," I am beginning to think I should stop my search for the
destroyed vehicle and give up that particular part of my research. And
I have not tracked down the refrigerator in which the Baudelaires
found the Verbal Fridge Dialogue, despite stories that it is also in
one of the Mortmain Mountain caves, or performing in some of the
gloomiest music halls in the city.

But even though there is much I do not know, there are a few mysteries
that I have solved for certain, and one thing I am sure about is where
the Baudelaire orphans went next, as the ashen waters of the Stricken
Stream hurried their toboggan out of the Mortmain Mountains, just as
the sugar bowl was hurried along, after the volunteer tossed it into
the stream to save it from the fire. But although I know exactly where
the Baudelaires went, and can even trace their path on a map drawn by
one of the most promising young cartographers of our time, I am not
the writer who can describe it best. The writer who can most
accurately and elegantly describe the path of the three orphans was an
associate of mine who, like the man who wrote "The Road Less
Traveled," is now dead. Before he died, however, he was widely
regarded as a very good poet, although some people think his writings
about religion were a little too mean-spirited. His name was Algernon
Charles Swinburne, and the last quatrain of the eleventh stanza of his
poem "The Garden of Proserpine" perfectly describes what the children
found as this chapter in their story drew to an end, and the next one
began. The first half of the quatrain reads, That no life lives
forever; That dead men rise up never; and indeed, the grown men in the
Baudelaires' lives who were dead, such as Jacques Snicket, or the
children's father, were never going to rise up. And the second half of
the quatrain reads, That even the weariest river Winds somewhere
safe to sea.

This part is a bit trickier, because some poems are a bit like secret
codes, in that you must study them carefully in order to discover
their meaning. A poet such as Quigley Quagmire's sister, Isadora, of
course, would know at once what those two lines mean, but it took me
quite some time before I decoded them. Eventually, however, it became
clear that "the weariest river" refers to the Stricken Stream, which
indeed seemed weary from carrying away all of the ashes from the
destruction of V.F.D. headquarters, and that "winds somewhere safe to
sea" refers to the last safe place where all the volunteers, including
Quigley Quagmire, could gather. As Sunny said, she and her siblings
did not know where to go, and they didn't know how to get there, but
the Baudelaire orphans were winding there anyway, and that is one
thing I know for certain.
