A Series of Unfortunate Events
Book the Third
The Wide Window
by Lemony Snicket


For Beatrice-
I would much prefer it if you were alive and well.


CHAPTER ONE

If you didn't know much about the Baudelaire orphans, and you saw them
sitting on their suitcases at Damocles Dock, you might think that they
were bound for an exciting adventure. After all, the three children
had just disembarked from the Fickle Ferry, which had driven them
across Lake Lachrymose to live with their Aunt Josephine, and in most
cases such a situation would lead to thrillingly good times.

But of course you would be dead wrong. For although Violet, Klaus, and
Sunny Baudelaire were about to experience events that would be both
exciting and memorable, they would not be exciting and memorable like
having your fortune told or going to a rodeo. Their adventure would be
exciting and memorable like being chased by a werewolf through a field
of thorny bushes at midnight with nobody around to help you. If you
are interested in reading a story filled with thrillingly good times,
I am sorry to inform you that you are most certainly reading the wrong
book, because the Baudelaires experience very few good times over the
course of their gloomy and miserable lives. It is a terrible thing,
their misfortune, so terrible that I can scarcely bring myself to
write about it. So if you do not want to read a story of tragedy and
sadness, this is your very last chance to put this book down, because
the misery of the Baudelaire orphans begins in the very next
paragraph.

"Look what I have for you," Mr. Poe said, grinning from ear to ear and
holding out a small paper bag. "Peppermints!" Mr. Poe was a banker
who had been placed in charge of handling the affairs of the
Baudelaire orphans after their parents died. Mr. Poe was kindhearted,
but it is not enough in this world to be kindhearted, particularly if
you are responsible for keeping children out of danger. Mr. Poe had
known the three children since they were born, and could never
remember that they were allergic to peppermints.

"Thank you, Mr. Poe," Violet said, and took the paper bag and peered
inside. Like most fourteen-year-olds, Violet was too well mannered to
mention that if she ate a peppermint she would break out in hives, a
phrase which here means "be covered in red, itchy rashes for a few
hours." Besides, she was too occupied with inventing thoughts to pay
much attention to Mr. Poe. Anyone who knew Violet would know that when
her hair was tied up in a ribbon to keep it out of her eyes, the way
it was now, her thoughts were filled with wheels, gears, levers, and
other necessary things for inventions. At this particular moment she
was thinking of how she could improve the engine of the Fickle Ferry
so it wouldn't belch smoke into the gray sky.

"That's very kind of you," said Klaus, the middle Baudelaire child,
smiling at Mr. Poe and thinking that if he had even one lick of a
peppermint, his tongue would swell up and he would scarcely be able to
speak. Klaus took his glasses off and wished that Mr. Poe had bought
him a book or a newspaper instead. Klaus was a voracious reader, and
when he had learned about his allergy at a birthday party when he was
eight, he had immediately read all his parents' books about allergies.
Even four years later he could recite the chemical formulas that
caused his tongue to swell up.

"Toi!" Sunny shrieked. The youngest Baudelaire was only an infant, and
like many infants, she spoke mostly in words that were tricky to
understand. By "Toi!" she probably meant "I have never eaten a
peppermint because I suspect that I, like my siblings, am allergic to
them," but it was hard to tell. She may also have meant "I wish I
could bite a peppermint, because I like to bite things with my four
sharp teeth, but I don't want to risk an allergic reaction."

"You can eat them on your cab ride to Mrs. Anwhistle's house," Mr. Poe
said, coughing into his white handkerchief. Mr. Poe always seemed to
have a cold and the Baudelaire orphans were accustomed to receiving
information from him between bouts of hacking and wheezing. "She
apologizes for not meeting you at the dock, but she says she's
frightened of it."

"Why would she be frightened of a dock?" Klaus asked, looking around
at the wooden piers and sailboats.

"She's frightened of anything to do with Lake Lachrymose," Mr. Poe
said, "but she didn't say why. Perhaps it has to do with her husband's
death. Your Aunt Josephine-she's not really your aunt, of course;
she's your second cousin's sister-in-law, but asked that you call her
Aunt Josephine-your Aunt Josephine lost her husband recently, and it
may be possible that he drowned or died in a boat accident. It didn't
seem polite to ask how she became a dowager. Well, let's put you in a
taxi."

"What does that word mean?" Violet asked.

Mr. Poe looked at Violet and raised his eyebrows. "I'm surprised at
you, Violet," he said. "A girl of your age should know that a taxi is
a car which will drive you someplace for a fee. Now, let's gather your
luggage and walk to the curb."

"'Dowager,'" Klaus whispered to Violet, "is a fancy word for 'widow.'"

"Thank you," she whispered back, picking up her suitcase in one hand
and Sunny in the other. Mr. Poe was waving his handkerchief in the air
to signal a taxi to stop, and in no time at all the cabdriver piled
all of the Baudelaire suitcases into the trunk and Mr. Poe piled the
Baudelaire children into the back seat.

"I will say good-bye to you here," Mr. Poe said. "The banking day has
already begun, and I'm afraid if I go with you out to Aunt Josephine's
I will never get anything done. Please give her my best wishes, and
tell her that I will keep in touch regularly." Mr. Poe paused for a
moment to cough into his handkerchief before continuing. "Now, your
Aunt Josephine is a bit nervous about having three children in her
house, but I assured her that you three were very well behaved. Make
sure you mind your manners, and, as always, you can call or fax me at
the bank if there's any sort of problem. Although I don't imagine
anything will go wrong thistime."

When Mr. Poe said "thistime," he looked at the children meaningfully
as if it were their fault that poor Uncle Monty was dead. But the
Baudelaires were too nervous about meeting their new caretaker to say
anything more to Mr. Poe except "So long."

"So long," Violet said, putting the bag of peppermints in her pocket.

"So long," Klaus said, taking one last look at Damocles Dock.

"Frul!" Sunny shrieked, chewing on her seat belt buckle.

"So long," Mr. Poe replied, "and good luck to you. I will think of the
Baudelaires as often as I can."

Mr. Poe gave some money to the taxi driver and waved good-bye to the
three children as the cab pulled away from the dock and onto a gray,
cobblestoned street. There was a small grocery store with barrels of
limes and beets out front. There was a clothing store called Look! It
Fits!, which appeared to be undergoing renovations. There was a
terrible-looking restaurant called the Anxious Clown, with neon lights
and balloons in the window. But mostly, there were many stores and
shops that were all closed up, with boards or metal gratings over the
windows and doors.

"The town doesn't seem very crowded," Klaus remarked. "I was hoping
we might make some new friends here."

"It's the off-season," the cabdriver said. He was a skinny man with a
skinny cigarette hanging out of his mouth, and as he talked to the
children he looked at them through the rear-view mirror. "The town of
Lake Lachrymose is a resort, and when the nice weather comes it's as
crowded as can be. But around now, things here are as dead as the cat
I ran over this morning. To make new friends, you'll have to wait
until the weather gets a little better. Speaking of which, Hurricane
Herman is expected to arrive in town in a week or so. You better make
sure you have enough food up there in the house."

"A hurricane on a lake?" Klaus asked. "I thought hurricanes only
occurred near the ocean."

"A body of water as big as Lake Lachrymose," the driver said, "can
have anything occur on it. To tell you the truth, I'd be a little
nervous about living on top of this hill. Once the storm hits, it'll
be very difficult to drive all the way down into town."

Violet, Klaus, and Sunny looked out the window and saw what the driver
meant by "all the way down." The taxi had turned one last corner and
arrived at the scraggly top of a tall, tall hill, and the children
could see the town far, far below them, the cobblestone road curling
around the buildings like a tiny gray snake, and the small square of
Damocles Dock with specks of people bustling around it. And out beyond
the dock was the inky blob of Lake Lachrymose, huge and dark as if a
monster were standing over the three orphans, casting a giant shadow
below them. For a few moments the children stared into the lake as if
hypnotized by this enormous stain on the landscape.

"The lake is so enormous," Klaus said, "and it looks so deep. I can
almost understand why Aunt Josephine is afraid of it."

"The lady who lives up here," the cabdriver asked, "is afraid of the
lake?"

"That's what we've been told," Violet said.

The cabdriver shook his head and brought the cab to a halt. "I don't
know how she can stand it, then."

"What do you mean?" Violet asked. "You mean you've never been to this
house?" he asked.

"No, never," Klaus replied. "We've never even met our Aunt Josephine
before."

"Well, if your Aunt Josephine is afraid of the water," the cabdriver
said, "I can't believe she lives here in this house."

"What are you talking about?" Klaus asked. "Well, take a look," the
driver answered, and got out of the cab.

The Baudelaires took a look. At first, the three youngsters saw only a
small boxy square with a peeling white door, and it looked as if the
house was scarcely bigger than the taxi which had taken them to it.
But as they piled out of the car and drew closer, they saw that this
small square was the only part of the house that was on top of the
hill. The rest of it-a large pile of boxy squares, all stuck together
like ice cubes-hung over the side, attached to the hill by long metal
stilts that looked like spider legs. As the three orphans peered down
at their new home, it seemed as if the entire house were holding on to
the hill for dear life.

The taxi driver took their suitcases out of the trunk, set them in
front of the peeling white door, and drove down the hill with a
toot!of his horn for a good-bye. There was a soft squeak as the
peeling white door opened, and from behind the door appeared a pale
woman with her white hair piled high on top of her head in a bun.

"Hello," she said, smiling thinly. "I'm your Aunt Josephine."

"Hello," Violet said, cautiously, and stepped forward to meet her new
guardian. Klaus stepped forward behind her, and Sunny crawled forward
behind him, but all three Baudelaires were walking carefully, as if
their weight would send the house toppling down from its perch. The
orphans couldn't help wondering how a woman who was so afraid of Lake
Lachrymose could live in a house that felt like it was about to fall
into its depths.


CHAPTER 2

"This is the radiator," Aunt Josephine said, pointing to a raditor
with a pale and skinny finger. "Please don't ever touch it. You may
find yourself very cold here in my home. I never turn on the radiator,
because I am frightened that it might explode, so it often gets chilly
in the evenings."

Violet and Klaus looked at one another briefly, and Sunny looked at
both of them. Aunt Josephine was giving them a tour of their new home
and so far appeared to be afraid ofeverything in it, from the welcome
mat-which, Aunt Josephine explained, could cause someone to trip and
break their neck-to the sofa in the living room, which she said could
fall over at any time and crush them flat.

"This is the telephone," Aunt Josephine said, gesturing to the
telephone. "It should only be used in emergencies, because there is a
danger of electrocution."

"Actually," Klaus said, "I've read quite a bit about electricity. I'm
pretty sure that the telephone is perfectly safe."

Aunt Josephine's hands fluttered to her white hair as if something had
jumped onto her head. "You can't believe everything you read," she
pointed out.

"I've built a telephone from scratch," Violet said. "If you'd like, I
could take the telephone apart and show you how it works. That might
make you feel better."

"I don't think so," Aunt Josephine said, frowning.

"Delmo!" Sunny offered, which probably meant something along the lines
of "If you wish, I will bite the telephone to show you that it's
harmless."

"Delmo?" Aunt Josephine asked, bending over to pick up a piece of lint
from the faded flowery carpet. "What do you mean by 'delmo'? I
consider myself an expert on the English language, and I have no idea
what the word 'delmo' means. Is she speaking some other language?"

"Sunny doesn't speak fluently yet, I'm afraid," Klaus said, picking
his little sister up. "Just baby talk, mostly."

"Grun!" Sunny shrieked, which meant something like "I object to your
calling it baby talk!"

"Well, I will have to teach her proper English," Aunt Josephine said
stiffly. "I'm sure you all need some brushing up on your grammar,
actually. Grammar is the greatest joy in life, don't you find?"

The three siblings looked at one another. Violet was more likely to
say that inventing things was the greatest joy in life, Klaus thought
reading was, and Sunny of course took no greater pleasure than in
biting things. The Baudelaires thought of grammar-all those rules
about how to write and speak the English language-the way they thought
of banana bread: fine, but nothing to make a fuss about. Still, it
seemed rude to contradict Aunt Josephine.

"Yes," Violet said finally. "We've always loved grammar."

Aunt Josephine nodded, and gave the Baudelaires a small smile. "Well,
I'll show you to your room and continue the rest of the tour after
dinner. When you open this door, just push on the wood here. Never use
the doorknob. I'm always afraid that it will shatter into a million
pieces and that one of them will hit my eye."

The Baudelaires were beginning to think that they would not be allowed
to touch a single object in the whole house, but they smiled at Aunt
Josephine, pushed on the wood, and opened the door to reveal a large,
well-lit room with blank white walls and a plain blue carpet on the
floor. Inside were two good-sized beds and one good-sized crib,
obviously for Sunny, each covered in a plain blue bedspread, and at
the foot of each bed was a large trunk, for storing things. At the
other end of the room was a large closet for everyone's clothes, a
small window for looking out, and a medium-sized pile of tin cans for
no apparent purpose.

"I'm sorry that all three of you have to share a room," Aunt Josephine
said, "but this house isn't very big. I tried to provide you with
everything you would need, and I do hope you will be comfortable."

"I'm sure we will," Violet said, carrying her suitcase into the room.
"Thank you very much, Aunt Josephine."

"In each of your trunks," Aunt Josephine said, "there is a present."

Presents? The Baudelaires had not received presents for a long, long
time. Smiling, Aunt Josephine walked to the first trunk and opened it.
"For Violet," she said, "there is a lovely new doll with plenty of
outfits for it to wear." Aunt Josephine reached inside and pulled out
a plastic doll with a tiny mouth and wide, staring eyes. "Isn't she
adorable? Her name is Pretty Penny."

"Oh, thank you," said Violet, who at fourteen was too old for dolls
and had never particularly liked dolls anyway. Forcing a smile on her
face, she took Pretty Penny from Aunt Josephine and patted it on its
little plastic head.

"And for Klaus," Aunt Josephine said, "there is a model train set."
She opened the second trunk and pulled out a tiny train car. "You can
set up the tracks in that empty corner of the room."

"What fun," said Klaus, trying to look excited. Klaus had never liked
model trains, as they were a lot of work to put together and when you
were done all you had was something that went around and around in
endless circles.

"And for little Sunny," Aunt Josephine said, reaching into the
smallest trunk, which sat at the foot of the crib, "here is a rattle.
See, Sunny, it makes a little noise."

Sunny smiled at Aunt Josephine, showing all four of her sharp teeth,
but her older siblings knew that Sunny despised rattles and the
irritating sounds they made when you shook them. Sunny had been given
a rattle when she was very small, and it was the only thing she was
not sorry to lose in the enormous fire that had destroyed the
Baudelaire home.

"It is so generous of you," Violet said, "to give us all of these
things." She was too polite to add that they weren't things they
particularly liked.

"Well, I am very happy to have you here," Aunt Josephine said. "I love
grammar so much. I'm excited to be able to share my love of grammar
with three nice children like yourselves. Well, I'll give you a few
minutes to settle in and then we'll have some dinner. See you soon."

"Aunt Josephine," Klaus asked, "what are these cans for?"

"Those cans? For burglars, naturally," Aunt Josephine said, patting
the bun of hair on top of her head. "You must be as frightened of
burglars as I am. So every night, simply place these tin cans right by
the door, so that when burglars come in, they'll trip over the cans
and you'll wake up."

"But what will we do then, when we're awake in a room with an angry
burglar?" Violet asked. "I would prefer to sleep through a burglary."

Aunt Josephine's eyes grew wide with fear. "Angry burglars?" she
repeated. "Angry burglars? Why are you talking about angry
burglars?Are you trying to make us all even more frightened than we
already are?"

"Of course not," Violet stuttered, not pointing out that Aunt
Josephine was the one who had brought up the subject. "I'm sorry. I
didn't mean to frighten you."

"Well, we'll say no more about it," Aunt Josephine said, looking
nervously at the tin cans as if a burglar were tripping on them at
that very minute. "I'll see you at the dinner table in a few minutes."

Their new guardian shut the door, and the Baudelaire orphans listened
to her footsteps padding down the hallway before they spoke.

"Sunny can have Pretty Penny," Violet said, handing the doll to her
sister. "The plastic is hard enough for chewing, I think."

"And you can have the model trains, Violet," Klaus said. "Maybe you
can take apart the engines and invent something."

"But that leaves you with a rattle," Violet said. "That doesn't seem
fair."

"Schu!" Sunny shrieked, which probably meant something along the lines
of "It's been a long time since anything in our lives has felt fair."

The Baudelaires looked at one another with bitter smiles. Sunny was
right. It wasn't fair that their parents had been taken away from
them. It wasn't fair that the evil and revolting Count Olaf was
pursuing them wherever they went, caring for nothing but their
fortune. It wasn't fair that they moved from relative to relative,
with terrible things happening at each of their new homes, as if the
Baudelaires were riding on some horrible bus that stopped only at
stations of unfairness and misery. And, of course, it certainly wasn't
fair that Klaus only had a rattle to play with in his new home.

"Aunt Josephine obviously worked very hard to prepare this room for
us," Violet said sadly. "She seems to be a good-hearted person. We
shouldn't complain, even to ourselves."

"You're right," Klaus said, picking up his rattle and giving it a
halfhearted little shake. "We shouldn't complain."

"Twee!" Sunny shrieked, which probably meant something like "Both of
you are right. We shouldn't complain."

Klaus walked over to the window and looked out at the darkening
landscape. The sun was beginning to set over the inky depths of Lake
Lachrymose, and a cold evening wind was beginning to blow. Even from
the other side of the glass Klaus could feel a small chill. "I want
to complain, anyway," he said.

"Soup's on!" Aunt Josephine called from the kitchen. "Please come to
dinner!"

Violet put her hand on Klaus's shoulder and gave it a little squeeze
of comfort, and without another word the three Baudelaires headed back
down the hallway and into the dining room. Aunt Josephine had set the
table for four, providing a large cushion for Sunny and another pile
of tin cans in the corner of the room, just in case burglars tried to
steal their dinner.

"Normally, of course," Aunt Josephine said, "'soup's on' is an
idiomatic expression that has nothing to do with soup. It simply means
that dinner is ready. In this case, however, I've actually made soup."

"Oh good," Violet said. "There's nothing like hot soup on a chilly
evening."

"Actually, it's not hot soup," Aunt Josephine said. "I never cook
anything hot because I'm afraid of turning the stove on. It might
burst into flames. I've made chilled cucumber soup for dinner."

The Baudelaires looked at one another and tried to hide their dismay.
As you probably know, chilled cucumber soup is a delicacy that is best
enjoyed on a very hot day. I myself once enjoyed it in Egypt while
visiting a friend of mine who works as a snake charmer. When it is
well prepared, chilled cucumber soup has a delicious, minty taste,
cool and refreshing as if you are drinking something as well as eating
it. But on a cold day, in a drafty room, chilled cucumber soup is
about as welcome as a swarm of wasps at a bat mitzvah. In dead
silence, the three children sat down at the table with their Aunt
Josephine and did their best to force down the cold, slimy concoction.
The only sound was of Sunny's four teeth chattering on her soup spoon
as she ate her frigid dinner. As I'm sure you know, when no one is
speaking at the dinner table, the meal seems to take hours, so it felt
like much, much later when Aunt Josephine broke the silence.

"My dear husband and I never had children," she said, "because we were
afraid to. But I do want you to know that I'm very happy that you're
here. I am often very lonely up on this hill by myself, and when Mr.
Poe wrote to me about your troubles I didn't want you to be as lonely
as I was when I lost my dear Ike."

"Was Ike your husband?" Violet asked.

Aunt Josephine smiled, but she didn't look at Violet, as if she were
talking more to herself than to the Baudelaires. "Yes," she said, in a
faraway voice, "he was my husband, but he was much more than that. He
was my best friend, my partner in grammar, and the only person I knew
who could whistle with crackers in his mouth."

"Our mother could do that," Klaus said, smiling. "Her specialty was
Mozart's fourteenth symphony."

"Ike's was Beethoven's fourth quartet," Aunt Josephine replied.
"Apparently it's a family characteristic."

"I'm sorry we never got to meet him," Violet said. "He sounds
wonderful."

"He waswonderful," Aunt Josephine said, stirring her soup and blowing
on it even though it was ice cold. "I was so sad when he died. I felt
like I'd lost the two most special things in my life."

"Two?" Violet asked. "What do you mean?"

"I lost Ike," Aunt Josephine said, "and I lost Lake Lachrymose. I
mean, I didn't really lose it, of course. It's still down in the
valley. But I grew up on its shores. I used to swim in it every day. I
knew which beaches were sandy and which were rocky. I knew all the
islands in the middle of its waters and all the caves alongside its
shore. Lake Lachrymose felt like a friend to me. But when it took poor
Ike away from me I was too afraid to go near it anymore. I stopped
swimming in it. I never went to the beach again. I even put away all
my books about it. The only way I can bear to look at it is from the
Wide Window in the library."

"Library?" Klaus asked, brightening. "You have a library?"

"Of course," Aunt Josephine said. "Where else could I keep all my
books on grammar? If you've all finished with your soup, I'll show you
the library."

"I couldn't eat another bite," Violet said truthfully.

"Irm!" Sunny shrieked in agreement.

"No, no, Sunny," Aunt Josephine said. "'Irm' is not grammatically
correct. You mean to say, 'I have also finished my supper.'"

"Irm," Sunny insisted.

"My goodness, you do need grammar lessons," Aunt Josephine said. "All
the more reason to go to the library. Come, children."

Leaving behind their half-full soup bowls, the Baudelaires followed
Aunt Josephine down the hallway, taking care not to touch any of the
doorknobs they passed. At the end of the hallway, Aunt Josephine
stopped and opened an ordinary-looking door, but when the children
stepped through the door they arrived in a room that was anything but
ordinary.

The library was neither square nor rectangular, like most rooms, but
curved in the shape of an oval. One wall of the oval was devoted to
books-rows and rows and rows of them, and every single one of them was
about grammar. There was an encyclopedia of nouns placed in a series
of simple wooden bookshelves, curved to fit the wall. There were very
thick books on the history of verbs, lined up in metal bookshelves
that were polished to a bright shine. And there were cabinets made of
glass, with adjective manuals placed inside them as if they were for
sale in a store instead of in someone's house. In the middle of the
room were some comfortable-looking chairs, each with its own footstool
so one could stretch out one's legs while reading.

But it was the other wall of the oval, at the far end of the room,
that drew the children's attention. From floor to ceiling, the wall
was a window, just one enormous curved pane of glass, and beyond the
glass was a spectacular view of Lake Lachrymose . When the children
stepped forward to take a closer look, they felt as if they were
flying high above the dark lake instead of merely looking out on it.

"This is the only way I can stand to look at the lake," Aunt Josephine
said in a quiet voice. "From far away. If I get much closer I remember
my last picnic on the beach with my darling Ike. I warned him to wait
an hour after eating before he went into the lake, but he only waited
fortyfive minutes. He thought that was enough."

"Did he get cramps?" Klaus asked. "That's what's supposed to happen if
you don't wait an hour before you swim."

"That's one reason," Aunt Josephine said, "but in Lake Lachrymose,
there's another one. If you don't wait an hour after eating, the
Lachrymose Leeches will smell food on you, and attack."

"Leeches?" Violet asked.

"Leeches," Klaus explained, "are a bit like worms. They are blind and
live in bodies of water, and in order to feed, they attach themselves
to you and suck your blood."

Violet shuddered. "How horrible."

"Swoh!" Sunny shrieked, which probably meant something along the lines
of "Why in the world would you go swimming in a lake full of leeches?"

"The Lachrymose Leeches," Aunt Josephine said, "are quite different
from regular leeches. They each have six rows of very sharp teeth, and
one very sharp nose-they can smell even the smallest bit of food from
far, far away. The Lachrymose Leeches are usually quite harmless,
preying only on small fish. But if they smell food on a human they
will swarm around him and-and..." Tears came to Aunt Josephine's eyes,
and she took out a pale pink handkerchief and dabbed them away. "I
apologize, children. It is not grammatically correct to end a sentence
with the word 'and', but I get so upset when I think about Ike that I
cannot talk about his death."

"We're sorry we brought it up," Klaus said quickly. "We didn't mean
to upset you."

"That's all right," Aunt Josephine said, blowing her nose. "It's just
that I prefer to think of Ike in other ways. Ike always loved the
sunshine, and I like to imagine that wherever he is now, it's as sunny
as can be. Of course, nobody knows what happens to you after you die,
but it's nice to think of my husband someplace very, very hot, don't
you think?"

"Yes I do," Violet said. "It is very nice." She swallowed. She wanted
to say something else to Aunt Josephine, but when you have only known
someone for a few hours it is difficult to know what they would like
to hear. "Aunt Josephine," she said timidly, "have you thought of
moving someplace else? Perhaps if you lived somewhere far from Lake
Lachrymose, you might feel better."

"We'd go with you," Klaus piped up.

"Oh, I could never sell this house," Aunt Josephine said. "I'm
terrified of realtors."

The three Baudelaire youngsters looked at one another surreptitiously,
a word which here means "while Aunt Josephine wasn't looking." None of
them had ever heard of a person who was frightened of realtors.

There are two kinds of fears: rational and irrational- or, in simpler
terms, fears that make sense and fears that don't. For instance, the
Baudelaire orphans have a fear of Count Olaf, which makes perfect
sense, because he is an evil man who wants to destroy them. But if
they were afraid of lemon meringue pie, this would be an irrational
fear, because lemon meringue pie is delicious and has never hurt a
soul. Being afraid of a monster under the bed is perfectly rational,
because there may in fact be a monster under your bed at any time,
ready to eat you all up, but a fear of realtors is an irrational fear.
Realtors, as I'm sure you know, are people who assist in the buying
and selling of houses. Besides occasionally wearing an ugly yellow
coat, the worst a realtor can do to you is show you a house that you
find ugly, and so it is completely irrational to be terrified of them.

As Violet, Klaus, and Sunny looked down at the dark lake and thought
about their new lives with Aunt Josephine, they experienced a fear
themselves, and even a worldwide expert on fear would have difficulty
saying whether this was a rational fear or an irrational fear. The
Baudelaires' fear was that misfortune would soon befall them. On one
hand, this was an irrational fear, because Aunt Josephine seemed like
a good person, and Count Olaf was nowhere to be seen. But on the other
hand, the Baudelaires had experienced so many terrible things that it
seemed rational to think that another catastrophe was just around the
corner.


CHAPTER THREE

There is a way of looking at life called "keeping things in
perspective." This simply means "making yourself feel better by
comparing the things that are happening to you right now against other
things that have happened at a different time, or to different
people." For instance, if you were upset about an ugly pimple on the
end of your nose, you might try to feel better by keeping your pimple
in perspective. You might compare your pimple situation to that of
someone who was being eaten by a bear, and when you looked in the
mirror at your ugly pimple, you could say to yourself, "Well, at least
I'm not being eaten by a bear."

You can see at once why keeping things in perspective rarely works
very well, because it is hard to concentrate on somebody else being
eaten by a bear when you are staring at your own ugly pimple. So it
was with the Baudelaire orphans in the days that followed. In the
morning, when the children joined Aunt Josephine for a breakfast of
orange juice and untoasted bread, Violet thought to herself, "Well, at
least we're not being forced to cook for Count Olaf's disgusting
theater troupe." In the afternoon, when Aunt Josephine would take them
to the library and teach them all about grammar, Klaus thought to
himself, "Well, at least Count Olaf isn't about to whisk us away to
Peru." And in the evening, when the children joined Aunt Josephine for
a dinner of orange juice and untoasted bread, Sunny thought to
herself, "Zax!" which meant something along the lines of "Well, at
least there isn't a sign of Count Olaf anywhere."

But no matter how much the three siblings compared their life with
Aunt Josephine to the miserable things that had happened to them
before, they couldn't help but be dissatisfied with their
circumstances. In her free time, Violet would dismantle the gears and
switches from the model train set, hoping to invent something that
could prepare hot food without frightening Aunt Josephine, but she
couldn't help wishing that Aunt Josephine would simply turn on the
stove. Klaus would sit in one of the chairs in the library with his
feet on a footstool, reading about grammar until the sun went down,
but when he looked out at the gloomy lake he couldn't help wishing
that they were still living with Uncle Monty and all of his reptiles.
And Sunny would take time out from her schedule and bite the head of
Pretty Penny, but she couldn't help wishing that their parents were
still alive and that she and her siblings were safe and sound in the
Baudelaire home.

Aunt Josephine did not like to leave the house very much, because
there were so many things outside that frightened her, but one day the
children told her what the cabdriver had said about Hurricane Herman
approaching, and she agreed to take them into town in order to buy
groceries. Aunt Josephine was afraid to drive in automobiles, because
the doors might get stuck, leaving her trapped inside, so they walked
the long way down the hill. By the time the Baudelaires reached the
market their legs were sore from the walk.

"Are you sure that you won't let us cook for you?" Violet asked, as
Aunt Josephine reached into the barrel of limes. "When we lived with
Count Olaf, we learned how to make puttanesca sauce. It was quite easy
and perfectly safe."

Aunt Josephine shook her head. "It is my responsibility as your
caretaker to cook for you, and I am eager to try this recipe for cold
lime stew. Count Olaf certainly does sound evil. Imagine forcing
children to stand near a stove!"

"He was very cruel to us," Klaus agreed, not adding that being forced
to cook had been the least of their problems when they lived with
Count Olaf. "Sometimes I still have nightmares about the terrible
tattoo on his ankle. It always scared me."

Aunt Josephine frowned, and patted her bun. "I'm afraid you made a
grammatical mistake, Klaus," she said sternly. "When you said, 'It
always scared me,' you sounded as if you meant that his ankle always
scared you, but you meant his tattoo. So you should have said, 'The
tattoo always scared me.' Do you understand?"

"Yes, I understand," Klaus said, sighing. "Thank you for pointing that
out, Aunt Josephine."

"Niku!" Sunny shrieked, which probably meant something like "It wasn't
very nice to point out Klaus's grammatical mistake when he was talking
about something that upset him."

"No, no, Sunny," Aunt Josephine said firmly, looking up from her
shopping list. "'Niku' isn't a word. Remember what we said about using
correct English. Now, Violet, would you please get some cucumbers? I
thought I would make chilled cucumber soup again sometime next week."

Violet groaned inwardly, a phrase which here means "said nothing but
felt disappointed at the prospect of another chilly dinner," but she
smiled at Aunt Josephine and headed down an aisle of the market in
search of cucumbers. She looked wistfully at all the delicious food on
the shelves that required turning on the stove in order to prepare it.
Violet hoped that someday she could cook a nice hot meal for Aunt
Josephine and her siblings using the invention she was working on with
the model train engine. For a few moments she was so lost in her
inventing thoughts that she didn't look where she was going until she
walked right into someone.

"Excuse m-" Violet started to say, but when she looked up she couldn't
finish her sentence. There stood a tall, thin man with a blue sailor
hat on his head and a black eye patch covering his left eye. He was
smiling eagerly down at her as if she were a brightly wrapped birthday
present that he couldn't wait to rip open. His fingers were long and
bony, and he was leaning awkwardly to one side, a bit like Aunt
Josephine's house dangling over the hill. When Violet looked down, she
saw why: There was a thick stump of wood where his left leg should
have been, and like most people with peg legs, this man was leaning on
his good leg, which caused him to tilt. But even though Violet had
never seen anyone with a peg leg before, this was not why she couldn't
finish her sentence. The reason why had to do with something she
hadseen before-the bright, bright shine in the man's one eye, and
above it, just one long eyebrow.

When someone is in disguise, and the disguise is not very good, one
can describe it as a transparent disguise. This does not mean that the
person is wearing plastic wrap or glass or anything else transparent.
It merely means that people can see through his disguise-that is, the
disguise doesn't fool them for a minute. Violet wasn't fooled for even
a second as she stood staring at the man she'd walked into. She knew
at once it was Count Olaf.

"Violet, what are you doing in this aisle?" Aunt Josephine said,
walking up behind her. "This aisle contains food that needs to be
heated, and you know-" When she saw Count Olaf she stopped speaking,
and for a second Violet thought that Aunt Josephine had recognized
him, too. But then Aunt Josephine smiled, and Violet's hopes were
dashed, a word which here means "shattered."

"Hello," Count Olaf said, smiling at Aunt Josephine. "I was just
apologizing for running into your sister here."

Aunt Josephine's face grew bright red, seeming even brighter under her
white hair. "Oh, no," she said, as Klaus and Sunny came down the aisle
to see what all the fuss was about. "Violet is not my sister, sir. I
am her legal guardian."

Count Olaf clapped one hand to his face as if Aunt Josephine had just
told him she was the tooth fairy. "I cannot believe it," he said.
"Madam, you don't look nearly old enough to be anyone's guardian."

Aunt Josephine blushed again. "Well, sir, I have lived by the lake my
whole life, and some people have told me that it keeps me looking
youthful."

"I would be happy to have the acquaintance of a local personage,"
Count Olaf said, tipping his blue sailor hat and using a silly word
which here means "person." "I am new to this town, and beginning a new
business, so I am eager to make new acquaintances. Allow me to
introduce myself."

"Klaus and I are happy to introduce you," Violet said, with more
bravery than I would have had when faced with meeting Count Olaf
again. "Aunt Josephine, this is Count-"

"No, no, Violet," Aunt Josephine interrupted. "Watch your grammar. You
should have said 'Klaus and I will behappy to introduce you,' because
you haven't introduced us yet."

"But-" Violet started to say.

"Now, Veronica," Count Olaf said, his one eye shining brightly as he
looked down at her. "Your guardian is right. And before you make any
other mistakes, allow me to introduce myself. My name is Captain Sham,
and I have a new business renting sailboats out on Damocles Dock. I am
happy to make your acquaintance, Miss-?"

"I am Josephine Anwhistle," Aunt Josephine said. "And these are
Violet, Klaus, and little Sunny Baudelaire."

"Little Sunny," Captain Sham repeated, sounding as if he were eating
Sunny rather than greeting her. "It's a pleasure to meet all of you.
Perhaps someday I can take you out on the lake for a little boat
ride."

"Ging!" Sunny shrieked, which probably meant something like "I would
rather eat dirt."

"We're not going anywhere with you," Klaus said.

Aunt Josephine blushed again, and looked sharply at the three
children. "The children seem to have forgotten their manners as well
as their grammar," she said. "Please apologize to Captain Sham at
once."

"He's not Captain Sham," Violet said impatiently. "He's Count Olaf."

Aunt Josephine gasped, and looked from the anxious faces of the
Baudelaires to the calm face of Captain Sham. He had a grin on his
face, but his smile had slipped a notch, a phrase which here means
"grown less confident as he waited to see if Aunt Josephine realized
he was really Count Olaf in disguise."

Aunt Josephine looked him over from head to toe, and then frowned.
"Mr. Poe told me to be on the watch for Count Olaf," she said finally,
"but he did also say that you children tended to see him everywhere."

"We see him everywhere," Klaus said tiredly, "because he
iseverywhere."

"Who is this Count Omar person?" Captain Sham asked.

"Count Olaf"Aunt Josephine said, "is a terrible man who-"

"-is standing right in front of us," Violet finished. "I don't care
what he calls himself. He has the same shiny eyes, the same single
eyebrow-"

"But plenty of people have those characteristics," Aunt Josephine
said. "Why, my mother-in-law had not only one eyebrow, but also only
one ear."

"The tattoo!" Klaus said. "Look for the tattoo! Count Olaf has a
tattoo of an eye on his left ankle."

Captain Sham sighed, and, with difficulty, lifted his peg leg so
everyone could get a clear look at it. It was made of dark wood that
was polished to shine as brightly as his eye, and attached to his left
knee with a curved metal hinge. "But I don't even have a left ankle,"
he said, in a whiny voice. "It was all chewed away by the Lachrymose
Leeches."

Aunt Josephine's eyes welled up, and she placed a hand on Captain
Sham's shoulder. "Oh, you poor man," she said, and the children knew
at once that they were doomed. "Did you hear what Captain Sham said?"
she asked them.

Violet tried one more time, knowing it would probably be futile, a
word which here means "filled with futility." "He's not Captain Sham,"
she said. "He's-"

"You don't think he would allow the Lachrymose Leeches to chew off his
leg," Aunt Josephine said, "just to play a prank on you? Tell us,
Captain Sham. Tell us how it happened."

"Well, I was sitting on my boat, just a few weeks ago," Captain Sham
said. "I was eating some pasta with puttanesca sauce, and I spilled
some on my leg. Before I knew it, the leeches were attacking."

"That's just how it happened with my husband," Aunt Josephine said,
biting her lip. The Baudelaires, all three of them, clenched their
fists in frustration. They knew that Captain Sham's story about the
puttanesca sauce was as phony as his name, but they couldn't prove it.

"Here," Captain Sham said, pulling a small card out of his pocket and
handing it to Aunt Josephine. "Take my business card, and next time
you're in town perhaps we could enjoy a cup of tea." "That sounds
delightful," Aunt Josephine said, reading his card. '"Captain Sham's
Sailboats. Every boat has it's own sail.' Oh, Captain, you have made a
very serious grammatical error here."

"What?" Captain Sham said, raising his eyebrow.

"This card says 'it's,' with an apostrophe. I-T- apostrophe-S always
means 'it is.' You don't mean to say 'Every boat has it is own sail.'
You mean simply I-T-S, 'belonging to it.' It's a very common mistake,
Captain Sham, but a dreadful one."

Captain Sham's face darkened, and it looked for a minute like he was
going to raise his peg leg again and kick Aunt Josephine with all his
might. But then he smiled and his face cleared. "Thank you for
pointing that out," he said finally.

"You're welcome," Aunt Josephine said. "Come, children, it's time to
pay for our groceries. I hope to see you soon, Captain Sham."

Captain Sham smiled and waved good-bye, but the Baudelaires watched as
his smile turned to a sneer as soon as Aunt Josephine had turned her
back. He had fooled her, and there was nothing the Baudelaires could
do about it. They spent the rest of the afternoon trudging back up the
hill carrying their groceries, but the heaviness of cucumbers and
limes was nothing compared to the heaviness in the orphans' hearts.
All the way up the hill, Aunt Josephine talked about Captain Sham and
what a nice man he was and how much she hoped they would see him
again, while the children knew he was really Count Olaf and a terrible
man and hoped they would never see him for the rest of their lives.

There is an expression that, I am sad to say, is appropriate for this
part of the story. The expression is "falling for something hook,
line, and sinker," and it comes from the world of fishing. The hook,
the line, and the sinker are all parts of a fishing rod, and they work
together to lure fish out of the ocean to their doom. If somebody is
falling for something hook, line, and sinker, they are believing a
bunch of lies and may find themselves doomed as a result. Aunt
Josephine was falling for Captain Sham's lies hook, line, and sinker,
but it was Violet, Klaus, and Sunny who were feeling doomed. As they
walked up the hill in silence, the children looked down at Lake
Lachrymose and felt the chill of doom fall over their hearts. It made
the three siblings feel cold and lost, as if they were not simply
looking at the shadowy lake, but had been dropped into the middle of
its depths.


CHAPTER FOUR

That night, the Baudelaire children sat at the table with Aunt
Josephine and ate their dinner with a cold pit in their stomachs. Half
of the pit came from the chilled lime stew that Aunt Josephine had
prepared. But the other half--if not more than half--came from the
knowledge that Count Olaf was in their lives once again.

"That Captain Sham is certainly a charming person," Aunt Josephine
said, putting a piece of lime rind in her mouth. "He must be very
lonely, moving to a new town and losing a leg. Maybe we could have
him over for dinner."

"We keep trying to tell you, Aunt Josephine," Violet said, pushing the
stew around on her plate so it would look like she'd eaten more than
she actually had. "He's not Captain Sham. He's Count Olaf in
disguise."

"I've had enough of this nonsense," Aunt Josephine said. "Mr. Poe told
me that Count Olaf had a tattoo on his left ankle and one eyebrow over
his eyes. Captain Sham doesn't have a left ankle and only has one eye.
I can't believe you would dare to disagree with a man who has eye
problems."

"I have eye problems," Klaus said, pointing to his glasses, "and
you're disagreeing with me."

"I will thank you not to be impertinent," Aunt Josephine said, using a
word which here means "pointing out that I'm wrong, which annoys me."
"It is very annoying. You will have to accept, once and for all, that
Captain Sham is notCount Olaf." She reached into her pocket and pulled
out the business card. "Look at his card. Does it say Count Olaf? No.
It says Captain Sham. The card does have a serious grammatical error
on it, but it is nevertheless proof that Captain Sham is who he says
he is."

Aunt Josephine put the business card down on the dinner table, and the
Baudelaires looked at it and sighed. Business cards, of course, are
not proof of anything. Anyone can go to a print shop and have cards
made that say anything they like. The king of Denmark can order
business cards that say he sells golf balls. Your dentist can order
business cards that say she is your grandmother. In order to escape
from the castle of an enemy of mine, I once had cards printed that
said I was an admiral in the French navy. Just because something is
typed-whether it is typed on a business card or typed in a newspaper
or book-this does not mean that it is true. The three siblings were
well aware of this simple fact but could not find the words to
convince Aunt Josephine. So they merely looked at Aunt Josephine,
sighed, and silently pretended to eat their stew.

It was so quiet in the dining room that everyone jumped-Violet, Klaus,
Sunny, and even Aunt Josephine-when the telephone rang. "My goodness!"
Aunt Josephine said. "What should we do?"

"Minka!" Sunny shrieked, which probably meant something like "Answer
it, of course!"

Aunt Josephine stood up from the table, but didn't move even as the
phone rang a second time. "It might be important," she said, "but I
don't know if it's worth the risk of electrocution."

"If it makes you feel more comfortable," Violet said, wiping her mouth
with her napkin, "I will answer the phone." Violet stood up and walked
to the phone in time to answer it on the third ring.

"Hello?" she asked.

"Is this Mrs. Anwhistle?" a wheezy voice asked.

"No," Violet replied. "This is Violet Baudelaire. May I help you?"

"Put the old woman on the phone, orphan," the voice said, and Violet
froze, realizing it was Captain Sham. Quickly, she stole a glance at
Aunt Josephine, who was now watching Violet nervously.

"I'm sorry," Violet said into the phone. "You must have the wrong
number."

"Don't play with me, you wretched girl-" Captain Sham started to say,
but Violet hung up the phone, her heart pounding, and turned to Aunt
Josephine.

"Someone was asking for the Hopalong Dancing School," she said, lying
quickly. "I told them they had the wrong number."

"What a brave girl you are," Aunt Josephine murmured. "Picking up the
phone like that."

"It's actually very safe," Violet said.

"Haven't you ever answered the phone, Aunt Josephine?" Klaus asked.

"Ike almost always answered it," Aunt Josephine said, "and he used a
special glove for safety. But now that I've seen you answer it, maybe
I'll give it a try next time somebody calls."

The phone rang, and Aunt Josephine jumped again. "Goodness," she
said, "I didn't think it would ring again so soon. What an
adventurous evening!"

Violet stared at the phone, knowing it was Captain Sham calling back.
"Would you like me to answer it again?" she asked.

"No, no," Aunt Josephine said, walking toward the small ringing phone
as if it were a big barking dog. "I said I'd try it, and I will." She
took a deep breath, reached out a nervous hand, and picked up the
phone.

"Hello?" she said. "Yes, this is she. Oh, hello, Captain Sham. How
lovely to hear your voice." Aunt Josephine listened for a moment, and
then blushed bright red. "Well, that's very nice of you to say,
Captain Sham, but-what? Oh, all right. That's very nice of you to say,
Julio.What? What? Oh, what a lovely idea. But please hold on one
moment."

Aunt Josephine held a hand over the receiver and faced the three
children. "Violet, Klaus, Sunny, please go to your room," she said.
"Captain Sham-I mean Julio, he asked me to call him by his first
name-is planning a surprise for you children, and he wants to discuss
it with me."

"We don't want a surprise," Klaus said.

"Of course you do," Aunt Josephine said. "Now run along so I can
discuss it without your eavesdropping."

"We're not eavesdropping," Violet said, "but I think it would be
better if we stayed here."

"Perhaps you are confused about the meaning of the word
'eavesdropping,'" Aunt Josephine said. "It means 'listening in.' If
you stay here, you will be eavesdropping. Please go to your room."

"We knowwhat eavesdropping means," Klaus said, but he followed his
sisters down the hallway to their room. Once inside, they looked at
one another in silent frustration. Violet put aside pieces of the toy
caboose that she had planned to examine that evening to make room on
her bed for the three of them to lie beside one another and frown at
the ceiling.

"I thought we'd be safe here," Violet said glumly. "I thought that
anybody who was frightened of realtors would never be friendly to
Count Olaf, no matter how he was disguised."

"Do you think that he actually let leeches chew off his leg," Klaus
wondered, shuddering, "just to hide his tattoo?"

"Choin!" Sunny shrieked, which probably meant "That seems a little
drastic, even for Count Olaf."

"I agree with Sunny," Violet said. "I think he told that tale about
leeches just to make Aunt Josephine feel sorry for him."

"And it sure worked," Klaus said, sighing. "After he told her that sob
story, she fell for his disguise hook, line, and sinker."

"At least she isn't as trusting as Uncle Monty," Violet pointed out.
"He let Count Olaf move right into the house."

"At least then we could keep an eye on him," Klaus replied.

"Ober!" Sunny remarked, which meant something along the lines of
"Although we still didn't save Uncle Monty."

"What do you think he's up to this time?" Violet asked. "Maybe he
plans to take us out in one of his boats and drown us in the lake."

"Maybe he wants to push this whole house off the mountain," Klaus
said, "and blame it on Hurricane Herman."

"Haftu!" Sunny said glumly, which probably meant something like "Maybe
he wants to put the Lachrymose Leeches in our beds."

"Maybe, maybe, maybe," Violet said. "All these maybes won't get us
anywhere."

"We could call Mr. Poe and tell him Count Olaf is here," Klaus said.
"Maybe he could come and fetch us."

"That's the biggest maybe of them all," Violet said. "It's always
impossible to convince Mr. Poe of anything, and Aunt Josephine doesn't
believe us even though she saw Count Olaf with her own eyes."

"She doesn't even think she saw Count Olaf," Klaus agreed sadly. "She
thinks she saw Captain Sham."

Sunny nibbled halfheartedly on Pretty Penny's head and muttered
"Poch!" which probably meant "You mean Julio."

"Then I don't see what we can do," Klaus said, "except keep our eyes
and ears open."

"Doma," Sunny agreed.

"You're both right," Violet said. "We'll just have to keep a very
careful watch."

The Baudelaire orphans nodded solemnly, but the cold pit in their
stomachs had not gone away. They all felt that keeping watch wasn't
really much of a plan for defending themselves from Captain Sham, and
as it grew later and later it worried them more and more. Violet tied
her hair up in a ribbon to keep it out of her eyes, as if she were
inventing something, but she thought and thought for hours and hours
and was unable to invent another plan. Klaus stared at the ceiling
with the utmost concentration, as if something very interesting were
written on it, but nothing helpful occurred to him as the hour grew
later and later. And Sunny bit Pretty Penny's head over and over, but
no matter how long she bit it she couldn't think of anything to ease
the Baudelaires' worries.

I have a friend named Gina-Sue who is socialist, and Gina-Sue has a
favorite saying: "You can't lock up the barn after the horses are
gone." It means simply that sometimes even the best of plans will
occur to you when it is too late. This, I'm sorry to say, is the case
with the Baudelaire orphans and their plan to keep a close watch on
Captain Sham, for after hours and hours of worrying they heard an
enormous crash of shattering glass, and knew at once that keeping
watch hadn't been a good enough plan.

"What was that noise?" Violet said, getting up off the bed.

"It sounded like breaking glass," Klaus said worriedly, walking toward
the bedroom door.

"Vestu!" Sunny shrieked, but her siblings did not have time to figure
out what she meant as they all hurried down the hallway.

"Aunt Josephine! Aunt Josephine!" Violet called, but there was no
answer. She peered up and down the hallway, but everything was quiet.
"Aunt Josephine!" she called again. Violet led the way as the three
orphans ran into the dining room, but their guardian wasn't there
either. The candles on the table were still lit, casting a flickering
glow on the business card and the bowls of cold lime stew.

"Aunt Josephine!" Violet called again, and the children ran back out
to the hallway and toward the door of the library. As she ran, Violet
couldn't help but remember how she and her siblings had called Uncle
Monty's name, early one morning, just before discovering the tragedy
that had befallen him. "Aunt Josephine!" she called. "Aunt Josephine!"
She couldn't help but remember all the times she had woken up in the
middle of the night, calling out the names of her parents as she
dreamed, as she so often did, of the terrible fire that had claimed
their lives. "Aunt Josephine!" she said, reaching the library door.
Violet was afraid that she was calling out Aunt Josephine's name when
her aunt could no longer hear it.

"Look," Klaus said, and pointed to the door. A piece of paper, folded
in half, was attached to the wood with a thumbtack. Klaus pried the
paper loose and unfolded it.

"What is it?" Violet asked, and Sunny craned her little neck to see.

"It's a note," Klaus said, and read it out loud:

Violet, Klaus, and Sunny -

By the time you read this note, my life will be at it's end. My heart
is as cold as ike and I find life inbearable. I know your children may
not understand the sad life of a dowadger, or what would have leaded
me to this desperate akt, but please know that I am much happier this
way. As my last will and testament, I leave you three in the care of
Captain Sham, a kind and honorable men. Please think of me kindly even
though I'd done this terrible thing.

-Your Aunt Josephine


"Oh no," Klaus said quietly when he was finished reading. He turned
the piece of paper over and over as if he had read it incorrectly, as
if it said something different. "Oh no," he said again, so faintly
that it was as if he didn't even know he was speaking out loud.

Without a word Violet opened the door to the library, and the
Baudelaires took a step inside and found themselves shivering. The
room was freezing cold, and after one glance the orphans knew why.
The Wide Window had shattered. Except for a few shards that still
stuck to the window frame, the enormous pane of glass was gone,
leaving a vacant hole that looked out into the still blackness of the
night.

The cold night air rushed through the hole, rattling the bookshelves
and making the children shiver up against one another, but despite the
cold the orphans walked carefully to the empty space where the window
had been, and looked down. The night was so black that it seemed as if
there was absolutely nothing beyond the window. Violet, Klaus, and
Sunny stood there for a moment and remembered the fear they had felt,
just a few days ago, when they were standing in this very same spot.
They knew now that their fear had been rational.

Huddling together, looking down into the blackness, the Baudelaires
knew that their plan to keep a careful watch had come too late. They
had locked the barn door, but poor Aunt Josephine was already gone.


CHAPTER FIVE

Violet, Klaus, and Sunny -

By the time you read this note, my life will be at it's end. My heart
is as cold as ike and I find life inbearable. I know your children may
not understand the sad life of a dowadger, or what would have leaded
me to this desperate akt, but please know that I am much happier this
way. As my last will and testament, I leave you three in the care of
Captain Sham, a kind and honorable men. Please think of me kindly even
though I'd done this terrible thing.

-Your Aunt Josephine


"Stop it!" Violet cried. "Stop reading it out loud, Klaus! We already
know what it says."

"I just can't believe it," Klaus said, turning the paper around for
the umpteenth time. The Baudelaire orphans were sitting glumly around
the dining-room table with the cold lime stew in bowls and dread in
their hearts. Violet had called Mr. Poe and told him what had
happened, and the Baudelaires, too anxious to sleep, had stayed up the
whole night waiting for him to arrive on the first Fickle Ferry of the
day. The candles were almost completely burned down, and Klaus had to
lean forward to read Josephine's note. "There's something funny about
this note, but I can't put my finger on it."

"How can you say such a thing?" Violet asked. "Aunt Josephine has
thrown herself out of the window. There's nothing funny about it at
all."

"Not funny as in a funny joke," Klaus said. "Funny as in a funny
smell. Why, in the very first sentence she says 'my life will be at
it's end.'"

"And now it is," Violet said, shuddering.

"That's not what I mean," Klaus said impatiently. "She uses it's, I-T
apostrophe-S, which always means 'it is.' But you wouldn't say 'my
life will be at it is end.' She means I-T-S, 'belonging to it.'" He
picked up Captain Sham's business card, which was still lying on the
table. "Remember when she saw this card?'Every boat has it's own
sail.' She said it was a serious grammatical error."

"Who cares about grammatical errors," Violet asked, "when Aunt
Josephine has jumped out the window?" "But Aunt Josephine would have
cared," Klaus pointed out. "That's what she cared about most: grammar.
Remember, she said it was the greatest joy in life."

"Well, it wasn't enough," Violet said sadly. "No matter how much she
liked grammar, it says she found her life unbearable."

"But that's another error in the note," Klaus said. "It doesn't say
unbearable,with a U. It says inbearable, with an I."

"You are being unbearable, with a U," Violet cried.

"And youare being stupid, with an S," Klaus snapped.

"Aget!" Sunny shrieked, which meant something along the lines of
"Please stop fighting!"

Violet and Klaus looked at their baby sister and then at one another.
Oftentimes, when people are miserable, they will want to make other
people miserable, too. But it never helps.

"I'm sorry, Klaus," Violet said meekly. "You're not unbearable. Our
situation is unbearable."

"I know," Klaus said miserably. "I'm sorry, too. You're not stupid,
Violet. You're very clever. In fact, I hope you're clever enough to
get us out of this situation. Aunt Josephine has jumped out the window
and left us in the care of Captain Sham, and I don't know what we can
do about it."

"Well, Mr. Poe is on his way," Violet said. "He said on the phone that
he would be here first thing in the morning, so we don't have long to
wait. Maybe Mr. Poe can be of some help."

"I guess so," Klaus said, but he and his sisters looked at one another
and sighed. They knew that the chances of Mr. Poe being of much help
were rather slim. When the Baudelaires lived with Count Olaf, Mr. Poe
was not helpful when the children told him about Count Olaf's cruelty.
When the Baudelaires lived with Uncle Monty, Mr. Poe was not helpful
when the children told him about Count Olaf's treachery. It seemed
clear that Mr. Poe would not be of any help in this situation, either.

One of the candles burned out in a small puff of smoke, and the
children sank down lower in their chairs. You probably know of a plant
called the Venus flytrap, which grows in the tropics. The top of the
plant is shaped like an open mouth, with tooth like spines around the
edges. When a fly, attracted by the smell of the flower, lands on the
Venus flytrap, the mouth of the plant begins to close, trapping the
fly. The terrified fly buzzes around the closed mouth of the plant,
but there is nothing it can do, and the plant slowly, slowly,
dissolves the fly into nothing. As the darkness of the house closed in
around them, the Baudelaire youngsters felt like the fly in this
situation. It was as if the disastrous fire that took the lives of
their parents had been the beginning of a trap, and they hadn't even
known it. They buzzed from place to place-Count Olaf's house in the
city, Uncle Monty's home in the country, and now, Aunt Josephine's
house overlooking the lake-but their own misfortune always closed
around them, tighter and tighter, and it seemed to the three siblings
that before too long they would dissolve away to nothing.

"We could rip up the note," Klaus said finally. "Then Mr. Poe wouldn't
know about Aunt Josephine's wishes, and we wouldn't end up with
Captain Sham."

"But I already told Mr. Poe that Aunt Josephine left a note," Violet
said.

"Well, we could do a forgery," Klaus said, using a word which here
means "write something yourself and pretend somebody else wrote it."
"We'll write everything she wrote, but we'll leave out the part about
Captain Sham."

"Aha!" Sunny shrieked. This word was a favorite of Sunny's, and unlike
most of her words, it needed no translation. What Sunny meant was
"Aha!", an expression of discovery.

"Of course!" Violet cried. "That's what Captain Sham did! He wrotethis
letter, not Aunt Josephine!"

Behind his glasses, Klaus's eyes lit up. "That explains it's!"

"That explains inbearable !"Violet said.

"Leep!" Sunny shrieked, which probably meant "Captain Sham threw Aunt
Josephine out the window and then wrote this note to hide his crime."

"What a terrible thing to do," Klaus said, shuddering as he thought of
Aunt Josephine falling into the lake she feared so much.

"Imagine the terrible things he will do to us," Violet said, "if we
don't expose his crime. I can't wait until Mr. Poe gets here so we can
tell him what happened."

With perfect timing, the doorbell rang, and the Baudelaires hurried to
answer it. Violet led her siblings down the hallway, looking wistfully
at the radiator as she remembered how afraid of it Aunt Josephine was.
Klaus followed closely behind, touching each doorknob gently in memory
of Aunt Josephine's warnings about them shattering into pieces. And
when they reached the door, Sunny looked mournfully at the welcome mat
that Aunt Josephine thought could cause someone to break their neck.
Aunt Josephine had been so careful to avoid anything that she thought
might harm her, but harm had still come her way.

Violet opened the peeling white door, and there stood Mr. Poe in the
gloomy light of dawn. "Mr. Poe," Violet said. She intended to tell him
immediately of their forgery theory, but as soon as she saw him,
standing in the doorway with a white handkerchief in one hand and a
black briefcase in the other, her words stuck in her throat. Tears are
curious things, for like earthquakes or puppet shows they can occur at
any time, without any warning and without any good reason. "Mr. Poe,"
Violet said again, and without any warning she and her siblings burst
into tears. Violet cried, her shoulders shaking with sobs, and Klaus
cried, the tears making his glasses slip down his nose, and Sunny
cried, her open mouth revealing her four teeth. Mr. Poe put down his
briefcase and put away his handkerchief. He was not very good at
comforting people, but he put his arms around the children the best he
could, and murmured "There, there," which is a phrase some people
murmur to comfort other people despite the fact that it doesn't really
mean anything.

Mr. Poe couldn't think of anything else to say that might have
comforted the Baudelaire orphans, but I wish now that I had the power
to go back in time and speak to these three sobbing children. If I
could, I could tell the Baudelaires that like earthquakes and puppet
shows, their tears were occurring not only without warning but without
good reason. The youngsters were crying, of course, because they
thought Aunt Josephine was dead, and I wish I had the power to go back
and tell them that they were wrong. But of course, I cannot. I am not
on top of the hill, overlooking Lake Lachrymose, on that gloomy
morning. I am sitting in my room, in the middle of the night, writing
down this story and looking out my window at the graveyard behind my
home. I cannot tell the Baudelaire orphans that they are wrong, but I
can tell you, as the orphans cry in Mr. Poe's arms, that Aunt
Josephine is not dead. Not yet.


CHAPTER SIX

Mr. Poe frowned, sat down at the table, and took out his handkerchief.
"Forgery?" he repeated. The Baudelaire orphans had shown him the
shattered window in the library. They had shown him the note that had
been thumb-tacked to the door. And they had shown him the business
card with the grammatical mistake on it. "Forgery is a very serious
charge," he said sternly, and blew his nose.

"Not as serious as murder," Klaus pointed out. "And that's what
Captain Sham did. He murdered Aunt Josephine and forged a note."

"But why would this Captain Sham person," Mr. Poe asked, "go to all
this trouble just to place you under his care?"

"We've already told you," Violet said, trying to hide her impatience.
"Captain Sham is really Count Olaf in disguise."


"These are very serious accusations," Mr. Poe said firmly. "I
understand that the three of you have had some terrible experiences,
and I hope you're not letting your imagination get the best of you.
Remember when you lived with Uncle Monty? You were convinced that his
assistant, Stephano, was really Count Olaf in disguise."

"But Stephano wasCount Olaf in disguise," Klaus exclaimed. "That's
not the point," Mr. Poe said. "The point is that you can't jump to
conclusions. If you really think this note is a forgery, then we have
to stop talking about disguises and do an investigation. Somewhere in
this house, I'm sure we can find something that your Aunt Josephine
has written. We can compare the handwriting and see if this note
matches up."

The Baudelaire orphans looked at one another. "Of course," Klaus said.
"If the note we found on the library door doesn't match Aunt
Josephine's handwriting, then it was obviously written by somebody
else. We didn't think of that."

Mr. Poe smiled. "You see? You are very intelligent children, but even
the most intelligent people in the world often need the help of a
banker. Now, where can we find a sample of Aunt Josephine's
handwriting?"

"In the kitchen," Violet said promptly. "She left her shopping list in
the kitchen when we got home from the market."

"Chuni!" Sunny shrieked, which probably meant "Let's go to the kitchen
and get it," and that's exactly what they did. Aunt Josephine's
kitchen was very small and had a large white sheet covering the stove
and the oven-for safety, Aunt Josephine had explained, during her
tour. There was a countertop where she prepared the food, a
refrigerator where she stored the food, and a sink where she washed
away the food nobody had eaten. To one side of the countertop was a
small piece of paper on which Aunt Josephine had made her list, and
Violet crossed the kitchen to retrieve it. Mr. Poe turned on the
lights, and Violet held the shopping list up to the note to see if
they matched.

There are men and women who are experts in the field of handwriting
analysis. They are called graphologists, and they attend graph logical
schools in order to get their degree in graphology. You might think
that this situation would call for a graphologist, but there are times
when an expert's opinion is unnecessary. For instance, if a friend of
yours brought you her pet dog, and said she was concerned because it
wasn't laying eggs, you would not have to be a veterinarian to tell
her that dogs do not lay eggs and so there was nothing to worry about.

Yes, there are some questions that are so simple that anyone can
answer them, and Mr. Poe and the Baudelaire orphans instantly knew the
answer to the question "Does the handwriting on the shopping list
match the handwriting on the note?" The answer was yes. When Aunt
Josephine had written "Vinegar" on the shopping list, she had curved
the tips of the V into tiny spirals-the same spirals that decorated
the tips of the V in "Violet," on the note. When she had written
"Cucumbers" on the shopping list, the Cs were slightly squiggly, like
earthworms, and the same earthworms appeared in the words "cold" and
"Captain Sham" on the note. When Aunt Josephine had written "Limes" on
the shopping list, the i was dotted with an oval rather than a circle,
just as it was in "my life will be at it's end." There was no doubt
that Aunt Josephine had written on both the pieces of paper that Mr.
Poe and the Baudelaires were examining.

"I don't think there's any doubt that Aunt Josephine wrote on both
these pieces of paper," Mr. Poe said.

"But-" Violet began.

"There are no buts about it," Mr. Poe said. "Look at the curvy Vs.
Look at the squiggly C's. Look at the oval dots over the I's. I'm no
graphologist, but I can certainly tell that these were written by the
same person."

"You're right," Klaus said miserably. "I know that Captain Sham is
behind this somehow, but Aunt Josephine definitely wrote this note."

"And that," Mr. Poe said, "makes it a legal document."

"Does that mean we have to live with Captain Sham?" Violet asked, her
heart sinking.

"I'm afraid so," Mr. Poe replied. "Someone's last will and testament
is an official statement of the wishes of the deceased. You were
placed in Aunt Josephine's care, so she had the right to assign you to
a new caretaker before she leaped out the window. It is very shocking,
certainly, but it is entirely legal."

"We won't go live with him," Klaus said fiercely. "He's the worst
person on earth."

"He'll do something terrible, I know it," Violet said. "All he's
after is the Baudelaire fortune."

"Gind!" Sunny shrieked, which meant something like "Please don't make
us live with this evil man."

"I know you don't like this Captain Sham person," Mr. Poe said, "but
there's not much I can do about it. I'm afraid the law says that
that's where you'll go."

"We'll run away," Klaus said.

"You will do nothing of the kind," Mr. Poe said sternly. "Your parents
entrusted me to see that you would be cared for properly. You want to
honor your parents' wishes, don't you?"

"Well, yes," Violet said, "but-"

"Then please don't make a fuss," Mr. Poe said. "Think of what your
poor mother and father would say if they knew you were threatening to
run away from your guardian."

The Baudelaire parents, of course, would have been horrified to learn
that their children were to be in the care of Captain Sham, but before
the children could say this to Mr. Poe, he had moved on to other
matters. "Now, I think the easiest thing to do would be to meet with
Captain Sham and go over some details. Where is his business card?
I'll phone him now."

"On the table, in the dining room," Klaus said glumly, and Mr. Poe
left the kitchen to make the call. The Baudelaires looked at Aunt
Josephine's shopping list and the suicide note.

"I just can't believe it," Violet said. "I was sure we were on the
right track with the forgery idea."

"Me too," Klaus said. "Captain Sham has done something here-I knowhe
has-but he's been even sneakier than usual."

"We'd better be smarter than usual, then," Violet replied, "because
we've got to convince Mr. Poe before it's too late."

"Well, Mr. Poe said he had to go over some details," Klaus said.
"Perhaps that will take a long time."

"I got ahold of Captain Sham," Mr. Poe said, coming back into the
kitchen. "He was shocked to hear of Aunt Josephine's death but
overjoyed at the prospect of raising you children. We're meeting him
in a half hour for lunch at a restaurant in town, and after lunch
we'll go over the details of your adoption. By tonight you should be
staying in his house. I'm sure you're relieved that this can be sorted
out so quickly."

Violet and Sunny stared at Mr. Poe, too dismayed to speak. Klaus was
silent too, but he was staring hard at something else. He was staring
at Aunt Josephine's note. His eyes were focused in concentration
behind his glasses as he stared and stared at it, without blinking.
Mr. Poe took his white handkerchief out of his pocket and coughed into
it at great length and with great gusto, a word which here means "in a
way which produced a great deal of phlegm." But none of the
Baudelaires said a word.

"Well," Mr. Poe said finally, "I will call for a taxicab. There's no
use walking down that enormous hill. You children comb your hair and
put your coats on. It's very windy out and it's getting cold. I think
a storm might be approaching."

Mr. Poe left to make his phone call, and the Baudelaires trudged to
their room. Rather than comb their hair, however, Sunny and Violet
immediately turned to Klaus. "What?" Violet asked him.

"Whatwhat?" Klaus answered.

"Don't give me that whatwhat," Violet answered. "You've figured
something out, that's whatwhat. I know you have. You were rereading
Aunt Josephine's note for the umpteenth time, but you had an
expression as if you had just figured something out. Now, what is it?"

"I'm not sure," Klaus said, looking over the note one more time. "I
might have begun figuring something out. Something that could help us.
But I need more time."

"But we don't have any time!" Violet cried.

"We're going to have lunch with Captain Sham right now!"

"Then we're going to have to make some more time, somehow," Klaus said
determinedly.

"Come on, children!" Mr. Poe called from the hallway. "The cab will
be here any minute! Get your coats and let's go!"

Violet sighed, but went to the closet and took out all three
Baudelaire coats. She handed Klaus his coat, and buttoned Sunny into
her coat as she talked to her brother. "How can we make more time?"
Violet asked.

"You're the inventor," Klaus answered, buttoning his coat.

"But you can't invent things like time," Violet said. "You can invent
things like automatic popcorn poppers. You can invent things like
steam-powered window washers. But you can't invent more time.''Violet
was so certain she couldn't invent more time that she didn't even put
her hair up in a ribbon to keep it out of her eyes. She merely gave
Klaus a look of frustration and confusion, and started to put on her
coat. But as she did up the buttons she realized she didn't even need
to put her hair up in a ribbon, because the answer was right there
with her.


CHAPTER SEVEN

"Hello, I'm Larry, your waiter," said Larry, the Baudelaire orphans'
waiter. He was a short, skinny man in a goofy clown costume with a
name tag pinned to his chest that read LARRY. "Welcome to the Anxious
Clown restaurant--where everybody has a good time, whether they like
it or not. I can see we have a whole family lunching together today,
so allow me to recommend the Extra Fun Special Family Appetizer. It's
a bunch of things fried up together and served with a sauce."

"What a wonderful idea," Captain Sham said, smiling in a way that
showed all of his yellow teeth. "An Extra Fun Special Family Appetizer
for an extra fun special family-mine''

"I'll just have water, thank you," Violet said.

"Same with me," Klaus said. "And a glass of ice cubes for my baby
sister, please."

"I'll have a cup of coffee with nondairy creamer," Mr. Poe said.

"Oh, no, Mr. Poe," Captain Sham said. "Let's share a nice big bottle
of red wine."

"No, thank you, Captain Sham," Mr. Poe said. "I don't like to drink
during banking hours."

"But this is a celebratory lunch," Captain Sham exclaimed. "We should
drink a toast to my three new children. It's not every day that a man
becomes a father."

"Please, Captain," Mr. Poe said. "It is heartening to see that you are
glad to raise the Baudelaires, but you must understand that the
children are rather upset about their Aunt Josephine."

There is a lizard called the chameleon that, as you probably know, can
change color instantly to blend into its surroundings. Besides being
slimy and cold-blooded, Captain Sham resembled the chameleon in that
he was chameleonic, a word means "able to blend in with any
situation." Since Mr. Poe and the Baudelaires had arrived at the
Anxious Clown, Captain Sham had been unable to conceal his excitement
at having the children almost in his clutches. But now that Mr. Poe
had pointed out that the occasion actually called for sadness, Captain
Sham instantly began to speak in a mournful voice. "I am upset, too,"
he said, brushing a tear away from beneath his eye patch. "Josephine
was one of my oldest and dearest friends."

"You met her yesterday"'Klaus said, "in the grocery store."

"It does only seem like yesterday," Captain Sham said, "but it was
really years ago. She and I met in cooking school. We were oven
partners in the Advanced Baking Course."

"You weren't even partners"Violet said, disgusted at Captain Sham's
lies. "Aunt Josephine was desperately afraid of turning on the oven.
She never would have attended cooking school."

"We soon became friends," Captain Sham said, going on with his story
as if no one had interrupted, "and one day she said to me, 'if I ever
adopt some orphans and then meet an untimely death, promise me you
will raise them for me.' I told her I would, but of course I never
thought I would have to keep my promise."

"That's a very sad story," Larry said, and everyone turned to see that
their waiter was still standing over them. "I didn't realize this was
a sad occasion. In that case, allow me to recommend the Cheer-Up
Cheeseburgers. The pickles, mustard, and ketchup make a little smiley
face on top of the burger, which is guaranteed to get you smiling,
too."

"That sounds like a good idea," Captain Sham said. "Bring us all
Cheer-Up Cheeseburgers, Larry."

"They'll be here in a jiffy," the waiter promised, and at last he was
gone.

"Yes, yes," Mr. Poe said, "but after we've finished our cheeseburgers,
Captain Sham, there are some important papers for you to sign. I have
them in my briefcase, and after lunch we'll look them over."

"And then the children will be mine?" Captain Sham asked.

"Well, you will be caring for them, yes," Mr. Poe said. "Of course,
the Baudelaire fortune will still be under my supervision, until
Violet comes of age."

"What fortune?" Captain Sham asked, his eyebrow curling. "I don't know
anything about a fortune."

"Duna!" Sunny shrieked, which meant something along the lines of "Of
course you do!"

"The Baudelaire parents," Mr. Poe explained, "left an enormous fortune
behind, and the children inherit it when Violet comes of age."

"Well, I have no interest in a fortune," Captain Sham said. "I have my
sailboats. I wouldn't touch a penny of it."

"Well, that's good," Mr. Poe said, "because you can'ttouch a penny of
it."

"We'll see," Captain Sham said.

"What?" Mr. Poe asked.

"Here are your Cheer-Up Cheeseburgers!" Larry sang out, appearing at
their table with a tray full of greasy-looking food. "Enjoy your
meal."

Like most restaurants filled with neon lights and balloons, the
Anxious Clown served terrible food. But the three orphans had not
eaten all day, and had not eaten anything warm for a long time, so
even though they were sad and anxious they found themselves with quite
an appetite. After a few minutes without conversation, Mr. Poe began
to tell a very dull story about something that had happened at the
bank. Mr. Poe was so busy talking, Klaus and Sunny were so busy
pretending to be interested, and Captain Sham was so busy wolfing down
his meal, that nobody noticed what Violet was up to.

When Violet had put on her coat to go out into the wind and cold, she
had felt the lump of something in her pocket. The lump was the bag of
peppermints that Mr. Poe had given the Baudelaires the day they had
arrived at Lake Lachrymose, and it had given her an idea. As Mr. Poe
droned on and on, she carefully, carefully, took the bag of
peppermints out of her coat pocket and opened it. To her dismay, they
were the kind of peppermints that are each wrapped up in a little bit
of cellophane. Placing her hands underneath the table, she unwrapped
three peppermints, using the utmost-the word "utmost," when it is used
here, means "most"- care not to make any of those crinkling noises
that come from unwrapping candy and are so annoying in movie theaters.
At last, she had three bare peppermints sitting on the napkin in her
lap. Without drawing attention to herself, she put one on Klaus's lap
and one on Sunny's.

When her younger siblings felt something appear in their laps and
looked down and saw the peppermints, they at first thought the eldest
Baudelaire orphan had lost her mind. But after a moment, they
understood.

If you are allergic to a thing, it is best not to put that thing in
your mouth, particularly if the thing is cats. But Violet, Klaus, and
Sunny all knew that this was an emergency. They needed time alone to
figure out Captain Sham's plan, and how to stop it, and although
causing allergic reactions is a rather drastic way of getting time by
yourself, it was the only thing they could think of. So while neither
of the adults at the table were watching, all three children put the
peppermints into their mouths and waited.

The Baudelaire allergies are famous for being quick- acting, so the
orphans did not have long to wait. In a few minutes, Violet began to
break out in red, itchy hives, Klaus's tongue started to swell up, and
Sunny, who of course had never eaten a peppermint, broke out in hives
andhad her tongue swell up.

Mr. Poe finally finished telling his story and then noticed the
orphans' condition. "Why, children," he said, "you look
terrible!Violet, you have red patches on your skin. Klaus, your tongue
is hanging out of your mouth. Sunny, both things are happening to
you."

"There must be something in this food that we're allergic to," Violet
said.

"My goodness," Mr. Poe said, watching a hive on Violet's arm grow to
the size of a hardboiled egg.

"Just take deep breaths," Captain Sham said, scarcely looking up from
his cheeseburger.

"I feel terrible," Violet said, and Sunny began to wail. "I think we
should go home and lie down, Mr. Poe."

"Just lean back in your seat," Captain Sham said sharply. "There's no
reason to leave when we're in the middle of lunch."

"Why, Captain Sham," Mr. Poe said, "the children are quite ill. Violet
is right. Come now, I'll pay the bill and we'll take the children
home."

"No, no," Violet said quickly. "We'll get a taxi. You two stay here
and take care of all the details."

Captain Sham gave Violet a sharp look. "I wouldn't dream of leaving
you all alone," he said in a dark voice.

"Well, there is a lot of paperwork to go over," Mr. Poe said. He
glanced at his meal, and the Baudelaires could see he was not too
eager to leave the restaurant and care for sick children. "We wouldn't
be leaving them alone for long."

"Our allergies are fairly mild," Violet said truthfully, scratching at
one of her hives. She stood up and led her swollen-tongued siblings
toward the front door. "We'll just lie down for an hour or two while
you have a relaxing lunch. When you have signed all the papers,
Captain Sham, you can just come and retrieve us."

Captain Sham's one visible eye grew as shiny as Violet had ever seen
it. "I'll do that," he replied. "I'll come and retrieve you very, very
soon."

"Good-bye, children," Mr. Poe said. "I hope you feel better soon. You
know, Captain Sham, there is someone at my bank who has terrible
allergies. Why, I remember one time..."

"Leaving so soon?" Larry asked the three children as they buttoned up
their coats. Outside, the wind was blowing harder, and it had started
to drizzle as Hurricane Herman got closer and closer to Lake
Lachrymose. But even so, the three children were eager to leave the
Anxious Clown, and not just because the garish restaurant-the word
"garish" here means "filled with balloons, neon lights, and obnoxious
waiters"-was filled with balloons, neon lights, and obnoxious waiters.
The Baudelaires knew that they had invented just a little bit of time
for themselves, and they had to use every second of it.


CHAPTER EIGHT

When someone's tongue swells up due to an allergic reaction, it is
often difficult to understand what they are saying.

"Bluh bluh bluh bluh bluh," Klaus said, as the three children got out
of the taxi and headed toward the peeling white door of Aunt
Josephine's house.

"I don't understand what you're saying," Violet said, scratching at a
hive on her neck that was the exact shape of the state of Minnesota.

"Bluh bluh bluh bluh bluh," Klaus repeated, or perhaps he was saying
something else; I haven't the faintest idea.

"Never mind, never mind," Violet said, opening the door and ushering
her siblings inside. "Now you have the time that you need to figure
out whatever it is that you're figuring out."

"Bluh bluh bluh," Klaus bluhed.

"I still can't understand you," Violet said. She took Sunny's coat
off, and then her own, and dropped them both on the floor. Normally,
of course, one should hang up one's coat on a hook or in a closet, but
itchy hives are very irritating and tend to make one abandon such
matters. "I'm going to assume, Klaus, that you said something in
agreement. Now, unless you need us to help you, I'm going to give
Sunny and myself a baking soda bath to help our hives."

"Bluh!" Sunny shrieked. She meant to shriek "Gans!" which meant
something along the lines of "Good, because my hives are driving me
crazy!"

"Bluh," Klaus said, nodding vigorously, and he began hurrying down the
hallway. Klaus had not taken off his coat, but it wasn't because of
his own irritating allergic condition. It was because he was going
someplace cold.

When Klaus opened the door of the library, he was surprised at how
much had changed. The wind from the approaching hurricane had blown
away the last of the window, and the rain had soaked some of Aunt
Josephine's comfortable chairs, leaving dark, spreading stains. A few
books had fallen from their shelves and blown over to the window,
where water had swollen them. There are few sights sadder than a
ruined book, but Klaus had no time to be sad. He knew Captain Sham
would come and retrieve the Baudelaires as soon as he could, so he had
to get right to work. First he took Aunt Josephine's note out of his
pocket and placed it on the table, weighing it down with books so it
wouldn't blow away in the wind. Then he crossed quickly to the shelves
and began to scan the spines of the books, looking for titles. He
chose three: Basic Rules of Grammar and Punctuation, Handbook for
Advanced Apostrophe Use,and The Correct Spelling of Every English Word
That Ever, Ever Existed.Each of the books was as thick as a
watermelon, and Klaus staggered under the weight of carrying all
three. With a loud thumphe dropped them on the table. "Bluh bluh bluh,
bluh bluh bluh bluh," he mumbled to himself, and found a pen and got
to work.

A library is normally a very good place to work in the afternoon, but
not if its window has been smashed and there is a hurricane
approaching. The wind blew colder and colder, and it rained harder and
harder, and the room became more and more unpleasant. But Klaus took
no notice of this. He opened all of the books and took copious-the
word "copious" here means "lots of-notes, stopping every so often to
draw a circle around some part of what Aunt Josephine had written. It
began to thunder outside, and with each roll of thunder the entire
house shook, but Klaus kept flipping pages and writing things down.
Then, as lightning began to flash outside, he stopped, and stared at
the note for a long time, frowning intently. Finally, he wrote two
words at the bottom of Aunt Josephine's note, concentrating so hard as
he did so that when Violet and Sunny entered the library and called
out his name he nearly jumped out of his chair.

"Bluh surprised bluh!" he shrieked, his heart pounding and his tongue
a bit less swollen.

"I'm sorry," Violet said. "I didn't mean to surprise you."

"Bluh bluh take a baking soda bluh?" he asked.

"No," Violet replied. "We couldn't take a baking soda bath. Aunt
Josephine doesn't have any baking soda, because she never turns on the
oven to bake. We just took a regular bath. But that doesn't matter,
Klaus. What have youbeen doing, in this freezing room? Why have you
drawn circles all over Aunt Josephine's note?"

"Bluhdying grammar," he replied, gesturing to the books.

"Bluh?" Sunny shrieked, which probably meant "gluh?" which meant
something along the lines of "Why are you wasting valuable time
studying grammar?"

"Bluhcause," Klaus explained impatiently, "I think bluh Josephine left
us a message in bluh note."

"She was miserable, and she threw herself out the window," Violet
said, shivering in the wind. "What other message could there be?"


"There are too many grammatical mistakes in the bluh," Klaus said.
"Aunt Josephine loved grammar, and she'd never make that many mistakes
unless she had a bluh reason. So that's what I've been doing
bluh-counting up the grammatical mistakes."

"Bluh," Sunny said, which meant something along the lines of "Please
continue, Klaus."

Klaus wiped a few raindrops off his glasses and looked down at his
notes. "Well, we already know that bluh first sentence uses the wrong
'its.' I think that was to get our attention. But look at the second
bluhtence. 'My heart is as cold as Ike and I find life inbearable.'"

"But the correct word is unbearable," Violet said. "You told us that
already."

"Bluh I think there's more," Klaus said. '"My heart is as cold as Ike'
doesn't sound right to me. Remember, Aunt Josephine told us bluh liked
to think of her husband someplace very hot."

"That's true," Violet said, remembering. "She said it right here in
this very room. She said Ike liked the sunshine and so she imagined
him someplace sunny."

"So I think Aunt Bluhsephine meant 'cold as ice"'Klaus said.

"Okay, so we have iceand unbearable. So far this doesn't mean anything
to me," Violet said.

"Me neither," Klaus said. "But look at bluh next part. 'I know your
children may not understand the sad life of a dowadger.' We don't have
any children."

"That's true," Violet said. "I'm not planning to have children until I
am considerably older."

"So why would Aunt Josephine say 'your children'? I think she meant
'youchildren.' And I looked up 'dowadger' in The Correct Spelling of
Every English Word That Ever, Ever Existed.'"

"Why?" Violet asked. "You already know it's a fancy word for widow."

"It isa bluhncy word for widow," Klaus replied, "but it's spelled
D-O-W-A-G-E-R. Aunt Josephine added an extra D."

"Cold as ice"Violet said, counting on her fingers, "unbearable,
youchildren, and an extra D in dowager. That's not much of a message,
Klaus."

"Let me finish," Klaus said. "I discovered even more grammbluhtical
mistakes. When she wrote, 'or what would have leaded me to this
desperate akt,' she meant 'what would have ledme,' and the word 'act,'
of course, is spelled with a C."

"Coik!" Sunny shrieked, which meant "Thinking about all this is making
me dizzy!"

"Me too, Sunny," Violet said, lifting her sister up so she could sit
on the table. "But let him finish."

"There are just bluh more," Klaus said, holding up two fingers. "One,
she calls Captain Sham 'a kind and honorable men,' when she should
have said 'a kind and honorable man.'And in the last sentence, Aunt
Josephine wrote 'Please think of me kindly even though I'd done this
terrible thing,' but according to the Handbook for Advanced Apostrophe
Use,she should have written 'even though I'vedone this terrible
thing.'"

"But so what?" Violet asked. "What do all these mistakes mean?"

Klaus smiled, and showed his sisters the two words he had written on
the bottom of the note.

"Curdled Cave," he read out loud.

"Curdled veek ?'Sunny asked, which meant "Curdled what?"

"Curdled Cave," Klaus repeated. "If you take all the letters involved
in the grammatical mistakes, that's what it spells. Look: C for ice
instead of Ike. U for unbearable instead of inbearable. The extra R in
your children instead of you children, and the extra D in dowager.
L-ED for led instead of leaded. C for act instead of akt. A for man
instead of men. And V-E for I've instead of I'd. That spells CURDLED
CAVE. Don't you see? Aunt Josephine knewshe was making grammatical
errors, and she knew we'd spot them. She was leaving us a message, and
the message is Curdled-"

A great gust of wind interrupted Klaus as it came through the
shattered window and shook the library as if it were maracas, a word
which describes rattling percussion instruments used in Latin American
music. Everything rattled wildly around the library as the wind flew
through it. Chairs and footstools flipped over and fell to the floor
with their legs in the air. The bookshelves rattled so hard that some
of the heaviest books in Aunt Josephine's collection spun off into
puddles of rainwater on the floor. And the Baudelaire orphans were
jerked violently to the ground as a streak of lightning flashed across
the darkening sky.

"Let's get out of here!" Violet shouted over the noise of the thunder,
and grabbed her siblings by the hand. The wind was blowing so hard
that the Baudelaires felt as if they were climbing an enormous hill
instead of walking to the door of the library. The orphans were quite
out of breath by the time they shut the library door behind them and
stood shivering in the hallway.

"Poor Aunt Josephine," Violet said. "Her library is wrecked."

"But I need to go back in there," Klaus said, holding up the note. "We
just found out what Aunt Josephine means by Curdled Cave, and we need
a library to find out more."

"Not that library," Violet pointed out. "All that library had were
books on grammar. We need her books on Lake Lachrymose."

"Why?" Klaus asked.

"Because I'll bet you anything that's where Curdled Cave is," Violet
said, "in Lake Lachrymose. Remember she said she knew every island in
its waters and every cave on its shore? I bet Curdled Cave is one of
those caves."

"But why would her secret message be about some cave?" Klaus asked.

"You've been so busy figuring out the message," Violet said, "that you
don't understand what it means. Aunt Josephine isn't dead. She just
wants people to thinkshe's dead. But she wanted to tell usthat she was
hiding. We have to find her books on Lake Lachrymose and find out
where Curdled Cave is."

"But first we have to know where the books are," Klaus said. "She told
us she hid them away, remember?"

Sunny shrieked something in agreement, but her siblings couldn't hear
her over a burst of thunder.

"Let's see," Violet said. "Where would you hide something if you
didn't want to look at it?"

The Baudelaire orphans were quiet as they thought of places they had
hidden things they did not want to look at, back when they had lived
with their parents in the Baudelaire home. Violet thought of an
automatic harmonica she had invented that had made such horrible
noises that she had hidden it so she didn't have to think of her
failure. Klaus thought of a book on the Franco- Prussian War that was
so difficult that he had hidden it so as not to be reminded that he
wasn't old enough to read it. And Sunny thought of a piece of stone
that was too hard for even her sharpest tooth, and how she had hidden
it so her jaw would no longer ache from her many attempts at
conquering it. And all three Baudelaire orphans thought of the hiding
place they had chosen.

"Underneath the bed," Violet said.

"Underneath the bed," Klaus agreed.

"Seeka yit," Sunny agreed, and without another word the three children
ran down the hallway to Aunt Josephine's room. Normally it is not
polite to go into somebody's room without knocking, but you can make
an exception if the person is dead, or pretending to be dead, and the
Baudelaires went right inside. Aunt Josephine's room was similar to
the orphans', with a navy-blue bedspread on the bed and a pile of tin
cans in the corner. There was a small window looking out onto the
rain-soaked hill, and a pile of new grammar books by the side of the
bed that Aunt Josephine had not started reading, and, I'm sad to say,
would never read. But the only part of the room that interested the
children was underneath the bed, and the three of them knelt down to
look there.

Aunt Josephine, apparently, had plenty of things she did not want to
look at anymore. Underneath the bed there were pots and pans, which
she didn't want to look at because they reminded her of the stove.
There were ugly socks somebody had given her as a gift that were too
ugly for human eyes. And the Baudelaires were sad to see a framed
photograph of a kind-looking man with a handful of crackers in one
hand and his lips pursed as if he were whistling. It was Ike, and the
Baudelaires knew that she had placed his photograph there because she
was too sad to look at it. But behind one of the biggest pots was a
stack of books, and the orphans immediately reached for it.

"The Tides of Lake Lachrymose,"Violet said, reading the title of the
top book. "That won't help."

"The Bottom of Lake Lachrymose," Klaus said, reading the next one.
"That's not useful."

"Lachrymose Trout," Violet read.

"The History of the Damocles Dock Region, " Klaus read.

"Ivan Lachrymose -Lake Explorer,"Violet read.

"How Water Is Made," Klaus read.

"A Lachrymose Atlas," Violet said.

"Atlas? That's perfect!" Klaus cried. "An atlas is a book of maps!"

There was a flash of lightning outside the window, and it began to
rain harder, making a sound on the roof like somebody was dropping
marbles on it. Without another word the Baudelaires opened the atlas
and began flipping pages. They saw map after map of the lake, but they
couldn't find Curdled Cave.

"This book is four hundred seventy-eight pages long," Klaus exclaimed,
looking at the last page of the atlas. "It'll take forever to find
Curdled Cave."

"We don't have forever," Violet said. "Captain Sham is probably on his
way here now. Use the index in the back. Look under 'Curdled.'"

Klaus flipped to the index, which I'm sure you know is an alphabetical
list of each thing a book contains and what page it's on. Klaus ran
his finger down the list of the C words, muttering out loud to
himself. "Carp Cove, Chartreuse Island, Cloudy Cliffs, Condiment Bay,
Curdled Cave-here it is! Curdled Cave, page one hundred four." Quickly
Klaus flipped to the correct page and looked at the detailed map.
"Curdled Cave, Curdled Cave, where is it?"

"There it is!" Violet pointed a finger at the tiny spot on the map
marked Curdled Cave.

"Directly across from Damocles Dock and just west of the Lavender
Lighthouse. Let's go."

"Go?" Klaus said. "How will we get across the lake?"

"The Fickle Ferry will take us," Violet said, pointing at a dotted
line on the map. "Look, the ferry goes right to the Lavender
Lighthouse, and we can walk from there."

"We're going to walk to Damocles Dock, in all this rain?" Klaus asked.

"We don't have any choice," Violet answered. "We have to prove that
Aunt Josephine is still alive, or else Captain Sham gets us."

"I just hope she is still-" Klaus started to say, but he stopped
himself and pointed out the window. "Look!"

Violet and Sunny looked. The window in Aunt Josephine's bedroom looked
out onto the hill, and the orphans could see one of the spidery metal
stilts that kept Aunt Josephine's house from falling into the lake.
But they could also see that this stilt had been badly damaged by the
howling storm. There was a large black burn mark, undoubtedly from
lightning, and the wind had bent the stilt into an uneasy curve. As
the storm raged around them, the orphans watched the stilt struggle to
stay attached.

"Tafca!" Sunny shrieked, which meant "We have to get out of here right
now!"

"Sunny's right," Violet said. "Grab the atlas and let's go."

Klaus grabbed A Lachrymose Atlas,not wanting to think what would be
happening if they were still leafing through the book and had not
looked up at the window. As the youngsters stood up, the wind rose to
a feverish pitch, a phrase which here means "it shook the house and
sent all three orphans toppling to the floor."

Violet fell against one of the bedposts and banged her knee. Klaus
fell against the cold radiator and banged his foot. And Sunny fell
into the pile of tin cans and banged everything. The whole room seemed
to lurch slightly to one side as the orphans staggered back to their
feet. "Come on!" Violet screamed, and grabbed Sunny. The orphans
scurried out to the hallway and toward the front door. A piece of the
ceiling had come off, and rainwater was steadily pouring onto the
carpet, splattering the orphans as they ran underneath it. The house
gave another lurch, and the children toppled to the floor again. Aunt
Josephine's house was starting to slip off the hill. "Come on!" Violet
screamed again, and the orphans stumbled up the tilted hallway to the
door, slipping in puddles and on their own frightened feet. Klaus was
the first to reach the front door, and yanked it open as the house
gave another lurch, followed by a horrible, horrible crunching sound.
"Come on!" Violet screamed again, and the Baudelaires crawled out of
the door and onto the hill, huddling together in the freezing rain.
They were cold. They were frightened. But they had escaped.

I have seen many amazing things in my long and troubled life history.
I have seen a series of corridors built entirely out of human skulls.
I have seen a volcano erupt and send a wall of lava crawling toward a
small village. I have seen a woman I loved picked up by an enormous
eagle and flown to its high mountain nest. But I still cannot imagine
what it was like to watch Aunt Josephine's house topple into Lake
Lachrymose. My own research tells me that the children watched in mute
amazement as the peeling white door slammed shut and began to crumple,
as you might crumple a piece of paper into a ball. I have been told
that the children hugged each other even more tightly as they heard
the rough and earsplitting noise of their home breaking loose from the
side of the hill. But I cannot tell you how it felt to watch the whole
building fall down, down, down, and hit the dark and stormy waters of
the lake below.


CHAPTER NINE

The United States Postal Service has a motto. The motto is: "Neither
rain nor sleet nor driving snow shall halt the delivery of the mails."
All this means is that even when the weather is nasty and your
mailperson wants to stay inside and enjoy a cup of cocoa, he or she
has to bundle up and go outside and deliver your mail anyway. The
United States Postal Service does not think that icy storms should
interfere with its duties.

The Baudelaire orphans were distressed to learn that the Fickle Ferry
had no such policy. Violet, Klaus, and Sunny had made their way down
the hill with much difficulty. The storm was rising, and the children
could tell that the wind and the rain wanted nothing more than to grab
them and throw them into the raging waters of Lake Lachrymose. Violet
and Sunny hadn't had the time to grab their coats as they escaped the
house, so all three children took turns wearing Klaus's coat as they
stumbled along the flooding road. Once or twice a car drove by, and
the Baudelaires had to scurry into the muddy bushes and hide, in case
Captain Sham was coming to retrieve them. When they finally reached
Damocles Dock, their teeth were chattering and their feet were so cold
they could scarcely feel their toes, and the sight of the CLOSED sign
in the window of the Fickle Ferry ticket booth was just about more
than they could stand.

"It's closed"Klaus cried, his voice rising with despair and in order
to be heard over Hurricane Herman. "How will we get to Curdled Cave
now?"

"We'll have to wait until it opens," Violet replied.

"But it won't open until the storm is past," Klaus pointed out, "and
by then Captain Sham will find us and take us far away. We have to get
to Aunt Josephine as soon as possible."

"I don't know how we can," Violet said, shivering. "The atlas says
that the cave is all the way across the lake, and we can't swimall
that way in this weather."

"Entro!" Sunny shrieked, which meant something along the lines of "And
we don't have enough time to walk around the lake, either."

"There must be other boats on this lake," Klaus said, "besides the
ferry. Motorboats, or fishing boats, or-" He trailed off, and his eyes
met those of his sisters. All three orphans were thinking the same
thing.

"Or sailboats"Violet finished for him. "Captain Sham's Sailboat
Rentals. He said it was right on Damocles Dock."

The Baudelaires stood under the awning of the ticket booth and looked
down at the far end of the deserted dock, where they could see a metal
gate that was very tall and had glistening spikes on the top of it.
Hanging over the metal gate was a sign with some words they couldn't
read, and next to the sign there was a small shack, scarcely visible
in the rain, with a flickering light in the window. The children
looked at it with dread in their hearts. Walking into Captain Sham's
Sailboat Rentals in order to find Aunt Josephine would feel like
walking into a lion's den in order to escape from a lion.

"We can't go there," Klaus said.

"We have to," Violet said. "We know Captain Sham isn't there, because
he's either on his way to Aunt Josephine's house or still at the
Anxious Clown."

"But whoever isthere," Klaus said, pointing to the flickering light,
"won't let us rent a sailboat."

"They won't know we're the Baudelaires," Violet replied. "We'll tell
whoever it is that we're the Jones children and that we want to go for
a sail."

"In the middle of a hurricane?" Klaus replied. "They won't believe
that."

"They'll have to," Violet said resolutely, a word which here means "as
if she believed it, even though she wasn't so sure," and she led her
siblings toward the shack. Klaus clasped the atlas close to his chest,
and Sunny, whose turn it was for Klaus's coat, clutched it around
herself, and soon the Baudelaires were shivering underneath the sign
that read: CAPTAIN SHAM'S SAILBOAT RENTALS-EVERY BOAT HAS IT'S OWN
SAIL. But the tall metal gate was locked up tight, and the Baudelaires
paused there, anxious about going inside the shack.

"Let's take a look," Klaus whispered, pointing to a window, but it was
too high for him or Sunny to use. Standing on tiptoe, Violet peered
into the window of the shack and with one glance she knew there was no
way they could rent a sailboat.

The shack was very small, with only room for a small desk and a single
lightbulb, which was giving off the flickering light. But at the desk,
asleep in a chair, was a person so massive that it looked like an
enormous blob was in the shack, snoring away with a bottle of beer in
one hand and a ring of keys in the other. As the person snored, the
bottle shook, the keys jangled, and the door of the shack creaked open
an inch or two, but although those noises were quite spooky, they
weren't what frightened Violet. What frightened Violet was that you
couldn't tell if this person was a man or a woman. There aren't very
many people like that in the world, and Violet knew which one this
was. Perhaps you have forgotten about Count Olaf's evil comrades, but
the Baudelaires had seen them in the flesh-lots of flesh, in this
comrade's case-and remembered all of them in gruesome detail. These
people were rude, and they were sneaky, and they did whatever Count
Olaf-or in this case, Captain Sham-told them to do, and the orphans
never knew when they would turn up. And now, one had turned up right
there in the shack, dangerous, treacherous, and snoring.

Violet's face must have shown her disappointment, because as soon as
she took a look Klaus asked, "What's wrong? I mean, besides Hurricane
Herman, and Aunt Josephine faking her own death, and Captain Sham
coming after us and everything."

"One of Count Olaf's comrades is in the shack," Violet said.

"Which one?" Klaus asked.

"The one who looks like neither a man nor a woman," Violet replied.

Klaus shuddered. "That's the scariest one."

"I disagree," Violet said. "I think the bald one is scariest."

"Vass!" Sunny whispered, which probably meant "Let's discuss this at
another time."

"Did he or she see you?" Klaus asked.

"No," Violet said. "He or she is asleep. But he or she is holding a
ring of keys. We'll need them, I bet, to unlock the gate and get a
sailboat."

"You mean we're going to steal a sailboat?" Klaus asked.

"We have no choice," Violet said. Stealing, of course, is a crime, and
a very impolite thing to do. But like most impolite things, it is
excusable under certain circumstances. Stealing is not excusable if,
for instance, you are in a museum and you decide that a certain
painting would look better in your house, and you simply grab the
painting and take it there. But if you were very, very hungry, and you
had no way of obtaining money, it might be excusable to grab the
painting, take it to your house, and eat it. "We have to get to
Curdled Cave as quickly as possible," Violet continued, "and the only
way we can do it is to steal a sailboat."

"I know that," Klaus said, "but how are we going to get the keys?"


"I don't know," Violet admitted. "The door of the shack is creaky, and
I'm afraid if we open it any wider we'll wake him or her up."

"You could crawl through the window," Klaus said, "by standing on my
shoulders. Sunny could keep watch."

"Where isSunny?" Violet asked nervously.

Violet and Klaus looked down at the ground and saw Klaus's coat
sitting alone in a little heap. They looked down the dock but only saw
the Fickle Ferry ticket booth and the foamy waters of the lake,
darkening in the gloom of the late afternoon.

"She's gone!" Klaus cried, but Violet put a finger to her lips and
stood on tiptoe to look in the window again. Sunny was crawling
through the open door of the shack, flattening her little body enough
so as not to open the door any wider.

"She's inside," Violet murmured.

"In the shack?" Klaus said in a horrified gasp. "Oh no. We have to
stop her."

"She's crawling very slowly toward that person," Violet said, afraid
even to blink.

"We promised our parents we'd take care of her," Klaus said. "We can't
let her do this."

"She's reaching toward the key ring," Violet said breathlessly. "She's
gently prying it loose from the person's hand."

"Don't tell me any more," Klaus said, as a bolt of lightning streaked
across the sky. "No, do tell me. What is happening?"

"She has the keys," Violet said. "She's putting them in her mouth to
hold them. She's crawling back toward the door. She's flattening
herself and crawling through."

"She's made it," Klaus said in amazement. Sunny came crawling
triumphantly toward the orphans, the keys in her mouth. "Violet, she
made it," Klaus said, giving Sunny a hug as a huge boom!of thunder
echoed across the sky.

Violet smiled down at Sunny, but stopped smiling when she looked back
into the shack. The thunder had awoken Count Olaf's comrade, and
Violet watched in dismay as the person looked at its empty hand where
the key ring had been, and then down on the floor where Sunny had left
little crawl-prints of rainwater, and then up to the window and right
into Violet's eyes.

"She's awake!" Violet shrieked. "He's awake! It's awake! Hurry, Klaus,
open the gate and I'll try to distract it."

Without another word, Klaus took the key ring from Sunny's mouth and
hurried to the tall metal gate. There were three keys on the ring- a
skinny one, a thick one, and one with teeth as jagged as the
glistening spikes hanging over the children. He put the atlas down on
the ground and began to try the skinny key in the lock, just as Count
Olaf's comrade came lumbering out of the shack.

Her heart in her throat, Violet stood in front of the creature and
gave it a fake smile. "Good afternoon," she said, not knowing whether
to add "sir" or "madam." "I seem to have gotten lost on this dock.
Could you tell me the way to the Fickle Ferry?"

Count Olaf's comrade did not answer, but kept shuffling toward the
orphans. The skinny key fit into the lock but didn't budge, and Klaus
tried the thick one.

"I'm sorry," Violet said, "I didn't hear you. Could you tell me-"

Without a word the mountainous person grabbed Violet by the hair, and
with one swing of its arm lifted her up over its smelly shoulder the
way you might carry a backpack. Klaus couldn't get the thick key to
fit in the lock and tried the jagged one, just as the person scooped
up Sunny with its other hand and held her up, the way you might hold
an ice cream cone. "Klaus!" Violet screamed. "Klaus!" The jagged key
wouldn't fit in the lock, either. Klaus, in frustration, shook and
shook the metal gate. Violet was kicking the creature from behind, and
Sunny was biting its wrist, but the person was so Brobdingnagian-a
word which here means "unbelievably husky"- that the children were
causing it minimal pain, a phrase which here means "no pain at all."
Count Olaf's comrade lumbered toward Klaus, holding the other two
orphans in its grasp. In desperation, Klaus tried the skinny key again
in the lock, and to his surprise and relief it turned and the tall
metal gate swung open. Just a few feet away were six sailboats tied to
the end of the dock with thick rope- sailboats that could take them to
Aunt Josephine. But Klaus was too late. He felt something grab the
back of his shirt, and he was lifted up in the air. Something slimy
began running down his back, and Klaus realized with horror that the
person was holding him in his or her mouth.

"Put me down!" Klaus screamed. "Put me down!"

"Put me down!" Violet yelled. "Put me down!"

"Poda rish!" Sunny shrieked. "Poda rish!"

But the lumbering creature had no concern for the wishes of the
Baudelaire orphans. With great sloppy steps it turned itself around
and began to carry the youngsters back toward the shack. The children
heard the gloppy sound of its chubby feet sloshing through the rain,
gumsh, gumsh, gumsh, gumsh.But then, instead of a gumsh,there was a
skittle-watas the person stepped on Aunt Josephine's atlas, which
slipped from under its feet. Count Olaf's comrade waved its arms to
keep its balance, dropping Violet and Sunny, and then fell to the
ground, opening its mouth in surprise and dropping Klaus. The orphans,
being in reasonably good physical shape, got to their feet much more
quickly than this despicable creature, and ran through the open gate
to the nearest sailboat. The creature struggled to right itself and
chase them, but Sunny had already bitten the rope that tied the boat
to the dock. By the time the creature reached the spiky metal gate,
the orphans were already on the stormy waters of Lake Lachrymose. In
the dim light of the late afternoon, Klaus wiped the grime of the
creature's foot off the cover of the atlas, and began to read it. Aunt
Josephine's book of maps had saved them once, in showing them the
location of Curdled Cave, and now it had saved them again.


CHAPTER TEN

The good people who are publishing this book have a concern that they
expressed to me. The concern is that readers like yourself will read
my history of the Baudelaire orphans and attempt to imitate some of
the things they do. So at this point in the story, in order to millify
the publishers--the word "mollify" here means "get them to stop
tearing their hair out in worry"-- please allow me to give you a piece
of advice, even though I don't know anything about you. The piece of
advice is as follows: If you ever need to get to Curdled Cave in a
hurry, do not, under any circumstances, steal a boat and attempt to
sail across Lake Lachrymose during a hurricane, because it is very
dangerous and the chances of your survival are practically zero. You
should especially not do this if, like the Baudelaire orphans, you
have only a vague idea of how to work a sailboat.

Count Olaf's comrade, standing at the dock and waving a chubby fist in
the air, grew smaller and smaller as the wind carried the sailboat
away from Damocles Dock. As Hurricane Herman raged over them, Violet,
Klaus, and Sunny examined the sailboat they had just stolen. It was
fairly small, with wooden seats and bright orange life jackets for
five people. On top of the mast, which is a word meaning "the tall
wooden post found in the middle of boats," was a grimy white sail
controlled by a series of ropes, and on the floor was a pair of wooden
oars in case there was no wind. In the back, there was a sort of
wooden lever with a handle for moving it this way and that, and under
one of the seats was a shiny metal bucket for bailing out any water in
case of a leak. There was also a long pole with a fishing net at the
end of it, a small fishing rod with a sharp hook and a rusty spying
glass, which is a sort of telescope used for navigating. The three
siblings struggled into their life vests as the stormy waves of Lake
Lachrymose took them farther and farther away from the shore.

"I read a book about working a sailboat," Klaus shouted over the noise
of the hurricane. "We have to use the sail to catch the wind. Then it
will push us where we want to go."

"And this lever is called a tiller," Violet shouted. "I remember it
from studying some naval blueprints. The tiller controls the rudder,
which is below the water, steering the ship. Sunny, sit in back and
work the tiller. Klaus, hold the atlas so we can tell where we're
going, and I'll try to work the sail. I think if I pull on thisrope, I
can control the sail."

Klaus turned the damp pages of the atlas to page 104. "Thatway," he
called, pointing to the right. "The sun is setting over there, so that
must be west."

Sunny scurried to the back of the sailboat and put her tiny hands on
the tiller just as a wave hit the boat and sprayed her with foam.
"Karg tern!" she called, which meant something along the lines of "I'm
going to move the tiller thisway, in order to steer the boat according
to Klaus's recommendation."

The rain whipped around them, and the wind howled, and a small wave
splashed over the side, but to the orphans' amazement, the sailboat
moved in the exact direction they wanted it to go. If you had come
across the three Baudelaires at this moment, you would have thought
their lives were filled with joy and happiness, because even though
they were exhausted, damp, and in very great danger, they began to
laugh in their triumph. They were so relieved that something had
finally gone right that they laughed as if they were at the circus
instead of in the middle of a lake, in the middle of a hurricane, in
the middle of trouble.

As the storm wore itself out splashing waves over the sailboat and
flashing lightning over their heads, the Baudelaires sailed the tiny
boat across the vast and dark lake. Violet pulled ropes this way and
that to catch the wind, which kept changing direction as wind tends to
do. Klaus kept a close eye on the atlas and made sure they weren't
heading off course to the Wicked Whirlpool or the Rancorous Rocks. And
Sunny kept the boat level by turning the tiller whenever Violet
signaled. And just when the evening turned to night, and it was too
dark to read the atlas, the Baudelaires saw a blinking light of pale
purple. The orphans had always thought lavender was a rather sickly
color, but for the first time in their lives they were glad to see it.
It meant that the sailboat was approaching the Lavender Lighthouse,
and soon they'd be at Curdled Cave. The storm finally broke-the word
"broke" here means "ended," rather than "shattered" or "lost all its
money"-and the clouds parted to reveal an almost-full moon. The
children shivered in their soaking clothes and stared out at the
calming waves of the lake, watching the swirls of its inky depths.

"Lake Lachrymose is actually very pretty," Klaus said thoughtfully. "I
never noticed it before."

"Cind," Sunny agreed, adjusting the tiller slightly.

"I guess we never noticed it because of Aunt Josephine," Violet said.
"We got used to looking at the lake through her eyes." She picked up
the spying glass and squinted into it, and she was just able to see
the shore. "I think I can see the lighthouse over there. There's a
dark hole in the cliff right next to it. It must be the mouth of
Curdled Cave."

Sure enough, as the sailboat drew closer and closer, the children
could just make out the Lavender Lighthouse and the mouth of the
nearby cave, but when they looked into its depths, they could see no
sign of Aunt Josephine, or of anything else for that matter. Rocks
began to scrape the bottom of the boat, which meant they were in very
shallow water, and Violet jumped out to drag the sailboat onto the
craggy shore. Klaus and Sunny stepped out of the boat and took off
their life jackets. Then they stood at the mouth of Curdled Cave and
paused nervously. In front of the cave there was a sign saying it was
for sale, and the orphans could not imagine who would want to buy such
a phantasmagorical-the word "phantasmagorical" here means "all the
creepy, scary words you can think of put together"-place. The mouth of
the cave had jagged rocks all over it like teeth in the mouth of a
shark. Just beyond the entrance the youngsters could see strange white
rock formations, all melted and twisted together so they looked like
moldy milk. The floor of the cave was as pale and dusty as if it were
made of chalk. But it was not these sights that made the children
pause. It was the sound coming out of the cave. It was a high-pitched,
wavering wail, a hopeless and lost sound, as strange and as eerie as
Curdled Cave itself.

"What is that sound?" Violet asked nervously.

"Just the wind, probably," Klaus replied. "I read somewhere that when
wind passes through small spaces, like caves, it can make weird
noises. It's nothing to be afraid of."


The orphans did not move. The sound did not stop.

"I'm afraid of it, anyway," Violet said.

"Me too," Klaus said.

"Geni," Sunny said, and began to crawl into the mouth of the cave. She
probably meant something along the lines of "We didn't sail a stolen
sailboat across Lake Lachrymose in the middle of Hurricane Herman just
to stand nervously at the mouth of a cave," and her siblings had to
agree with her and follow her inside. The wailing was louder as it
echoed off the walls and rock formations, and the Baudelaires could
tell it wasn't the wind. It was Aunt Josephine, sitting in a corner of
the cave and sobbing with her head in her hands. She was crying so
hard that she hadn't even noticed the Baudelaires come into the cave.

"Aunt Josephine," Klaus said hesitantly, "we're here."

Aunt Josephine looked up, and the children could see that her face was
wet from tears and chalky from the cave. "You figured it out," she
said, wiping her eyes and standing up. "I knew you could figure it
out," she said, and took each of the Baudelaires in her arms. She
looked at Violet, and then at Klaus, and then at Sunny, and the
orphans looked at her and found themselves with tears in their own
eyes as they greeted their guardian. It was as if they had not quite
believed that Aunt Josephine's death was fake until they had seen her
alive with their own eyes.

"I knew you were clever children," Aunt Josephine said. "I knew you
would read my message."

"Klaus really did it," Violet said.

"But Violet knew how to work the sailboat," Klaus said. "Without
Violet we never would have arrived here."

"And Sunny stole the keys," Violet said, "and worked the tiller."

"Well, I'm glad you all made it here," Aunt Josephine said. "Let me
just catch my breath and I'll help you bring in your things."

The children looked at one another. "What things?" Violet asked.

"Why, your luggage of course," Aunt Josephine replied. "And I hope
you brought some food, because the supplies I brought are almost
gone."

"We didn't bring any food," Klaus said.

"No food?" Aunt Josephine said. "How in the world are you going to
live with me in this cave if you didn't bring any food?"

"We didn't come here to live with you," Violet said.

Aunt Josephine's hands flew to her head and she rearranged her bun
nervously. "Then why are you here?" she asked.

"Stim!" Sunny shrieked, which meant "Because we were worried about
you!"

"'Stim' is not a sentence, Sunny," Aunt Josephine said sternly.
"Perhaps one of your older siblings could explain in correct English
why you're here."

"Because Captain Sham almost had us in his clutches!" Violet cried.
"Everyone thought you were dead, and you wrote in your will and
testament that we should be placed in the care of Captain Sham."

"But he forced me to do that," Aunt Josephine whined. "That night,
when he called me on the phone, he told me he was really Count Olaf.
He said I had to write out a will saying you children would be left in
his care. He said if I didn't write what he said, he would drown me in
the lake. I was so frightened that I agreed immediately."

"Why didn't you call the police?" Violet asked. "Why didn't you call
Mr. Poe? Why didn't you call somebody who could have helped?"

"You know why," Aunt Josephine said crossly. "I'm afraid of using the
phone. Why, I was just getting used to answering it. I'm nowhere near
ready to use the numbered buttons. But in any case, I didn't need to
call anybody. I threw a footstool through the window and then sneaked
out of the house. I left you the note so that you would know I wasn't
really dead, but I hid my message so that Captain Sham wouldn't know I
had escaped from him."

"Why didn't you take us with you? Why did you leave us all alone by
ourselves? Why didn't you protect us from Captain Sham?" Klaus asked.

"It is not grammatically correct," Aunt Josephine said, "to say 'leave
us all alone by ourselves.' You can say 'leave us all alone,' or
'leave us by ourselves,' but not both. Do you understand?"

The Baudelaires looked at one another in sadness and anger. They
understood. They understood that Aunt Josephine was more concerned
with grammatical mistakes than with saving the lives of the three
children. They understood that she was so wrapped up in her own fears
that she had not given a thought to what might have happened to them.
They understood that Aunt Josephine had been a terrible guardian, in
leaving the children all by themselves in great danger. They
understood and they wished more than ever that their parents, who
never would have run away and left them alone, had not been killed in
that terrible fire which had begun all the misfortune in the
Baudelaire lives.

"Well, enough grammar lessons for today," Aunt Josephine said. "I'm
happy to see you, and you are welcome to share this cave with me. I
don't think Captain Sham will ever find us here."

"We're not staying here''Violet said impatiently."We're sailing back
to town, and we're taking you with us."

"No way, Jose," Aunt Josephine said, using an expression which means
"No way" and has nothing to do with Jose, whoever he is. "I'm too
frightened of Captain Sham to face him. After all he's done to you I
would think that you would be frightened of him, too."

"We arefrightened of him," Klaus said, "but if we prove that he's
really Count Olaf he will go to jail. You are the proof. If you tell
Mr. Poe what happened, then Count Olaf will be locked away and we will
be safe."

"You can tell him, if you want to," Aunt Josephine said. "I'm staying
here."

"He won't believe us unless you come with us and prove that you're
alive," Violet said.

"No, no, no," Aunt Josephine said. "I'm too afraid."

Violet took a deep breath and faced her frightened guardian. "We're
allafraid," she said firmly. "We were afraid when we met Captain Sham
in the grocery store. We were afraid when we thought that you had
jumped out the window. We were afraid to give ourselves allergic
reactions, and we were afraid to steal a sailboat and we were afraid
to make our way across this lake in the middle of a hurricane. But
that didn't stop us."

Aunt Josephine's eyes filled up with tears. "I can't help it that
you're braver than I," she said. "I'm not sailing across that lake.
I'm not making any phone calls. I'm going to stay right here for the
rest of my life, and nothing you can say will change my mind."

Klaus stepped forward and played his trump card, a phrase which means
"said something very convincing, which he had saved for the end of the
argument." "Curdled Cave," he said, "is for sale."

"So what?" Aunt Josephine said.

"That means," Klaus said, "that before long certain people will come
to look at it. And some of those people"-he paused here
dramatically-"will be realtors."

Aunt Josephine's mouth hung open, and the orphans watched her pale
throat swallow in fear. "Okay," she said finally, looking around the
cave anxiously as if a realtor were already hiding in the shadows.
"I'll go."


CHAPTER ELEVEN

"Oh no," Aunt Josephine said.

The children paid no attention. The worst of Hurricane Herman was
over, and as the Baudelaires sailed across the dark lake there seemed
to be very little danger. Violet moved the sail around with ease now
that the wind was calm. Klaus looked back at the lavender light of the
lighthouse and confidently guided the way back to Damocles Dock. And
Sunny moved the tiller as if she had been a tiller-mover all her life.
Only Aunt Josephine was scared. She was wearing two life jackets
instead of one, and every few seconds she cried "Oh no," even though
nothing frightening was happening.

"Oh no," Aunt Josephine said, "and I mean it this time." "What's
wrong, Aunt Josephine?" Violet said tiredly. The sailboat had reached
the approximate middle of the lake. The water was still fairly calm,
and the lighthouse still glowed, a pinpoint of pale purple light.
There seemed to be no cause for alarm.

"We're about to enter the territory of the Lachrymose Leeches," Aunt
Josephine said.

"I'm sure we'll pass through safely," Klaus said, peering through the
spying glass to see if Damocles Dock was visible yet. "You told us
that the leeches were harmless and only preyed on small fish."

"Unless you've eaten recently," Aunt Josephine said.

"But it's been hours since we've eaten," Violet said soothingly. "The
last thing we ate were peppermints at the Anxious Clown. That was in
the afternoon, and now it's the middle of the night."

Aunt Josephine looked down, and moved away from the side of the boat.
"But I ate a banana," she whispered, "just before you arrived."

"Oh no," Violet said. Sunny stopped moving the tiller and looked
worriedly into the water.

"I'm sure there's nothing to worry about," Klaus said. "Leeches are
very small animals. If we were in the water, we might have reason to
fear, but I don't think they'd attack a sailboat. Plus, Hurricane
Herman may have frightened them away from their territory. I bet the
Lachrymose Leeches won't even show up."

Klaus thought he was done speaking for the moment, but in the moment
that followed he added one more sentence. The sentence was "Speak of
the Devil," and it is an expression that you use when you are talking
about something only to have it occur. For instance, if you were at a
picnic and said, "I hope it doesn't snow," and at that very minute a
blizzard began, you could say, "Speak of the Devil" before gathering
up your blanket and potato salad and driving away to a good
restaurant. But in the case of the Baudelaire orphans, I'm sure you
can guess what happened to prompt Klaus to use this expression.

"Speak of the Devil," Klaus said, looking into the waters of the lake.
Out of the swirling blackness came skinny, rising shapes, barely
visible in the moonlight. The shapes were scarcely longer than a
finger, and at first it looked as if someone were swimming in the lake
and drumming their fingers on the surface of the water. But most
people have only ten fingers, and in the few minutes that followed
there were hundreds of these tiny shapes, wriggling hungrily from all
sides toward the sailboat. The Lachrymose Leeches made a quiet,
whispering sound on the water as they swam, as if the Baudelaire
orphans were surrounded by people murmuring terrible secrets. The
children watched in silence as the swarm approached the boat, each
leech knocking lightly against the wood. Their tiny leech- mouths
puckered in disappointment as they tried to taste the sailboat.
Leeches are blind, but they aren't stupid, and the Lachrymose Leeches
knew that they were not eating a banana.

"You see?" Klaus said nervously, as the tapping of leech-mouths
continued. "We're perfectly safe."

"Yes," Violet said. She wasn't sure they were perfectly safe, not at
all, but it seemed best to tell Aunt Josephine they were perfectly
safe. "We're perfectly safe," she said.

The tapping sound continued, getting a little rougher and louder.
Frustration is an interesting emotional state, because it tends to
bring out the worst in whoever is frustrated. Frustrated babies tend
to throw food and make a mess. Frustrated citizens tend to execute
kings and queens and make a democracy. And frustrated moths tend to
bang up against lightbulbs and make light fixtures all dusty. But
unlike babies, citizens, and moths, leeches are quite unpleasant to
begin with. Now that the Lachrymose Leeches were getting frustrated,
everyone on board the sailboat was quite anxious to see what would
happen when frustration brought out the worst in leeches. For a
while, the small creatures tried and tried to eat the wood, but their
tiny teeth didn't really do anything but make an unpleasant knocking
sound. But then, all at once, the leeches knocked off, and the
Baudelaires watched them wriggle away from the sailboat.

"They're leaving," Klaus said hopefully, but they weren't leaving.
When the leeches had reached a considerable distance, they suddenly
swiveled their tiny bodies around and came rushing back to the boat.
With a loud thwack!the leeches all hit the boat more or less at once,
and the sailboat rocked precariously, a word which here means "in a
way which almost threw Aunt Josephine and the Baudelaire youngsters to
their doom." The four passengers were rocked to and fro and almost
fell into the waters of the lake, where the leeches were wriggling
away again to prepare for another attack.

"Yadec!" Sunny shrieked and pointed at the side of the boat. Yadec, of
course, is not grammatically correct English, but even Aunt Josephine
understood that the youngest Baudelaire meant "Look at the crack in
the boat that the leeches have made!" The crack was a tiny one, about
as long as a pencil and about as wide as a human hair, and it was
curved downward so it looked as if the sailboat were frowning at them.
If the leeches kept hitting the side of the boat, the frown would only
get wider.

"We have to sail much faster," Klaus said, "or this boat will be in
pieces in no time."

"But sailing relies on the wind," Violet pointed out. "We can't make
the wind go faster."

"I'm frightened!" Aunt Josephine cried. "Please don't throw me
overboard!"

"Nobody's going to throw you overboard," Violet said impatiently,
although I'm sorry to tell you that Violet was wrong about that. "Take
an oar, Aunt Josephine. Klaus, take the other one. If we use the
sail, the tiller, andthe oars we should move more quickly."

Thwack! The Lachrymose Leeches hit the side of the boat, widening the
crack in the side and rocking the boat again. One of the leeches was
thrown over the side in the impact, and twisted this way and that on
the floor of the boat, gnashing its tiny teeth as it looked for food.
Grimacing, Klaus walked cautiously over to it and tried to kick the
leech overboard, but it clung onto his shoe and began gnawing through
the leather. With a cry of disgust, Klaus shook his leg, and the leech
fell to the floor of the sailboat again, stretching its tiny neck and
opening and shutting its mouth. Violet grabbed the long pole with the
net at the end of it, scooped up the leech, and tossed it overboard.

Thwack! The crack widened enough that a bit of water began to dribble
through, making a small puddle on the sailboat's floor. "Sunny,"
Violet said, "keep an eye on that puddle. When it gets bigger, use the
bucket to throw it back in the lake."

"Mofee!" Sunny shrieked, which meant "I certainly will." There was the
whispering sound as the leeches swam away to ram the boat again. Klaus
and Aunt Josephine began rowing as hard as they could, while Violet
adjusted the sail and kept the net in her hand for any more leeches
who got on board.

Thwack! Thwack! There were two loud noises now, one on the side of the
boat and one on the bottom, which cracked immediately. The leeches had
divided up into two teams, which is good news for playing kickball but
bad news if you are being attacked. Aunt Josephine gave a shriek of
terror. Water was now leaking into the sailboat in two spots, and
Sunny abandoned the tiller to bail the water back out. Klaus stopped
rowing, and held the oar up without a word. It had several small bite
marks in it-the work of the Lachrymose Leeches.

"Rowing isn't going to work," he reported to Violet solemnly. "If we
row any more these oars will be completely eaten."

Violet watched Sunny crawl around with the bucket full of water.
"Rowing won't help us, anyway," she said. "This boat is sinking. We
need help."

Klaus looked around at the dark and still waters, empty except for the
sailboat and swarms of leeches. "Where can we get help in the middle
of a lake?" he asked.

"We're going to have to signal for help," Violet said, and reached
into her pocket and took out a ribbon. Handing Klaus the fishing net,
she used the ribbon to tie her hair up, keeping it out of her eyes.
Klaus and Sunny watched her, knowing that she only tied her hair up
this way when she was thinking of an invention, and right now they
needed an invention quite desperately.

"That's right," Aunt Josephine said to Violet, "close your eyes.
That's what I do when I'm afraid, and it always makes me feel better
to block out the fear."

"She's not blocking out anything," Klaus said crossly. "She's
concentrating."

Klaus was right. Violet concentrated as hard as she could, racking her
brain for a good way to signal for help. She thought of fire alarms.
With flashing lights and loud sirens, fire alarms were an excellent
way to signal for assistance. Although the Baudelaire orphans, of
course, sadly knew that sometimes the fire engines arrived too late to
save people's lives, a fire alarm was still a good invention, and
Violet tried to think of a way she could imitate it using the
materials around her. She needed to make a loud sound, to get
somebody's attention. And she needed to make a bright light, so that
person would know where they were.

Thwack! Thwack! The two teams of leeches hit the boat again, and there
was a splash as more water came pouring into the sailboat. Sunny
started to fill the bucket with water, but Violet reached forward and
took it from Sunny's hands. "Bero?" Sunny shrieked, which meant "Are
you crazy?" but Violet had no time to answer "No, as a matter of fact
I'm not." So she merely said "No," and, holding the bucket in one
hand, began to climb up the mast. It is difficult enough to climb up
the mast of a boat, but it is triple the difficulty if the boat is
being rocked by a bunch of hungry leeches, so allow me to advise you
that this is another thing that you should under no circumstances try
to do. But Violet Baudelaire was a wunderkind, a German word which
here means "someone who is able to quickly climb masts on boats being
attacked by leeches," and soon she was on the top of the swaying mast
of the boat. She took the bucket and hung it by its handle on the tip
of the mast so it swung this way and that, the way a bell might do in
a bell tower.

"I don't mean to interrupt you," Klaus called, scooping up a furious
leech in the net and tossing it as far as he could, "but this boat is
really sinking. Please hurry."

Violet hurried. Hurriedly, she grabbed ahold of a corner of the sail
and, taking a deep breath to prepare herself, jumped back down to the
floor of the boat. Just as she had hoped, the sail ripped as she
hurtled to the ground, slowing her down and leaving her with a large
piece of torn cloth. By now the sailboat had quite a lot of water in
it, and Violet splashed over to Aunt Josephine, avoiding the many
leeches that Klaus was tossing out of the boat as quickly as he could.

"I need your oar," Violet said, wadding the piece of sail up into a
ball, "and your hairnet."

"You can have the oar," Aunt Josephine said, handing it over. "But I
need my hairnet. It keeps my bun in place."

"Give her the hairnet!" Klaus cried, hopping up on one of the seats as
a leech tried to bite his knee.

"But I'm scared of having hair in my face," Aunt Josephine whined,
just as another pair of thwack!s hit the boat.

"I don't have time to argue with you!" Violet cried. "I'm trying to
save each of our lives! Give me your hairnet right now!"

"The expression," Aunt Josephine said, "is saving all of our lives,not
each of our lives"but Violet had heard enough. Splashing forward and
avoiding a pair of wriggling leeches, the eldest Baudelaire reached
forward and grabbed Aunt Josephine's hairnet off of her head. She
wrapped the crumpled part of the sail in the hairnet, and then grabbed
the fishing pole and attached the messy ball of cloth to the fishhook.
It looked like she was about to go fishing for some kind of fish that
liked sailboats and hair accessories for food.

Thwack! Thwack! The sailboat tilted to one side and then to the other.
The leeches had almost smashed their way through the side. Violet took
the oar and began to rub it up and down the side of the boat as fast
and as hard as she could.

"What are you doing?" Klaus asked, catching three leeches in one swoop
of his net.

"I'm trying to create friction," Violet said. "If I rub two pieces of
wood enough, I'll create friction. Friction creates sparks. When I get
a spark, I'll set the cloth and hairnet on fire and use it as a
signal."

"You want to set a fire?" Klaus cried. "But a fire will mean more
danger."

"Not if I wave the fire over my head, using the fishing pole," Violet
said. "I'll do that, and hit the bucket like a bell, and that should
create enough of a signal to fetch us some help." She rubbed and
rubbed the oar against the side of the boat, but no sparks appeared.
The sad truth was that the wood was too wet from Hurricane Herman and
from Lake Lachrymose to create enough friction to start a fire. It was
a good idea, but Violet realized, as she rubbed and rubbed without any
result, that it was the wrong idea.

Thwack! Thwack! Violet looked around at Aunt Josephine and her
terrified siblings and felt hope leak out of her heart as quickly as
water was leaking into the boat. "It's not working," Violet said
miserably, and felt tears fall down her cheeks. She thought of the
promise she made to her parents, shortly before they were killed, that
she would always take care of her younger siblings. The leeches
swarmed around the sinking boat, and Violet feared that she had not
lived up to her promise. "It's not working," she said again, and
dropped the oar in despair. "We need a fire, but I can't invent one."

"It's okay," Klaus said, even though of course it was not. "We'll
think of something."

"Tintet," Sunny said, which meant something along the lines of "Don't
cry. You tried your best," but Violet cried anyway. It is very easy to
say that the important thing is to try your best, but if you are in
real trouble the most important thing is not trying your best, but
getting to safety. The boat rocked back and forth, and water poured
through the cracks, and Violet cried because it looked like they would
never get to safety. Her shoulders shaking with sobs, she held the
spying glass up to her eye to see if, by any chance, there was a boat
nearby, or if the tide had happened to carry the sailboat to shore,
but all she could see was the moonlight reflecting on the rippling
waters of the lake. And this was a lucky thing. Because as soon as
Violet saw the flickering reflection, she remembered the scientific
principles of the convergence and refraction of light.

The scientific principles of the convergence and refraction of light
are very confusing, and quite frankly I can't make head or tail of
them, even when my friend Dr. Lorenz explains them to me. But they
made perfect sense to Violet. Instantly, she thought of a story her
father had told her, long ago, when she was just beginning to be
interested in science. When her father was a boy, he'd had a dreadful
cousin who liked to burn ants, starting a fire by focusing the light
of the sun with her magnifying glass. Burning ants, of course, is an
abhorrent hobby-the word "abhorrent" here means "what Count Olaf used
to do when he was about your age"-but remembering the story made
Violet see that she could use the lens of the spying glass to focus
the light of the moon and make a fire. Without wasting another moment,
she grabbed the spying glass and removed the lens, and then, looking
up at the moon, tilted the lens at an angle she hastily computed in
her head.

The moonlight passed through the lens and was concentrated into a
long, thin band of light, like a glowing thread leading right to the
piece of sail, held in a ball by Aunt Josephine's hairnet. In a moment
the thread had become a small flame.

"It's miraculous!" Klaus cried, as the flame took hold.

"It's unbelievable!" Aunt Josephine cried.

"Fonti!" Sunny shrieked.

"It's the scientific principles of the convergence and refraction of
light!" Violet cried, wiping her eyes. Stepping carefully to avoid
onboard leeches and so as not to put out the fire, she moved to the
front of the boat. With one hand, she took the oar and rang the
bucket, making a loud sound to get somebody's attention. With the
other hand, she held the fishing rod up high, making a bright light so
the person would know where they were. Violet looked up at her
homemade signaling device that had finally caught fire, all because of
a silly story her father had told her. Her father's ant- burning
cousin sounded like a dreadful person, but if she had suddenly
appeared on the sailboat Violet would have given her a big grateful
hug.

As it turned out, however, this signal was a mixed blessing, a phrase
which means "something half good and half bad." Somebody saw the
signal almost immediately, somebody who was already sailing in the
lake, and who headed toward the Baudelaires in an instant. Violet,
Klaus, Sunny, and even Aunt Josephine all grinned as they saw another
boat sail into view. They were being rescued, and that was the good
half. But their smiles began to fade as the boat drew closer and they
saw who was sailing it. Aunt Josephine and the orphans saw the wooden
peg leg, and the navy-blue sailor cap, and the eye patch, and they
knew who was coming to their aid. It was Captain Sham, of course, and
he was probably the worst half in the world.


CHAPTER TWELVE

"Welcome aboard," Captain Sham said, with a wicked grin that showed
his filthy teeth. "I'm happy to see you all. I thought you had been
killed when the old lady's house fell off the hill, but luckily my
associate told me you had stolen a boat and run away. And you,
Josephine--I thought you'd done the sensible thing and jumped out the
window."

I tried to do the sensible thing," Aunt Josephine said sourly. "But
these children came and got me."

Captain Sham smiled. He had expertly steered his sailboat so it was
alongside the one the Baudelaires had stolen, and Aunt Josephine and
the children had stepped over the swarming leeches to come aboard.
With a gurgly whoosh! their own sailboat was overwhelmed with water
and quickly sank into the depths of the lake. The Lachrymose Leeches
swarmed around the sinking sailboat, gnashing their tiny teeth.
"Aren't you going to say thank you, orphans?" Captain Sham asked,
pointing to the swirling place in the lake where their sailboat had
been. "If it weren't for me, all of you would be divided up into the
stomachs of those leeches."

"If it weren't for you," Violet said fiercely, "we wouldn't be in Lake
Lachrymose to begin with."

"You can blame thaton the old woman," he said, pointing to Aunt
Josephine. "Faking your own death was pretty clever, but not clever
enough. The Baudelaire fortune-and, unfortunately, the brats who come
with it-now belong to me."

"Don't be ridiculous," Klaus said. "We don't belong to you and we
never will. Once we tell Mr. Poe what happened he will send you to
jail."

"Is that so?" Captain Sham said, turning the sailboat around and
sailing toward Damocles Dock. His one visible eye was shining brightly
as if he were telling a joke. "Mr. Poe will send me to jail, eh? Why,
Mr. Poe is putting finishing touches on your adoption papers this very
moment. In a few hours, you orphans will be Violet, Klaus, and Sunny
Sham."

"Neihab!" Sunny shrieked, which meant "I'm Sunny Baudelaire, and I
will always be Sunny Baudelaire unless I decide for myself to legally
change my name!"

"When we explain that you forced Aunt Josephine to write that note,"
Violet said, "Mr. Poe will rip up those adoption papers into a
thousand pieces."

"Mr. Poe won't believe you," Captain Sham said, chuckling. "Why should
he believe three runaway pipsqueaks who go around stealing boats?"

"Because we're telling the truth!" Klaus cried.

"Truth, schmuth," Captain Sham said. If you don't care about
something, one way to demonstrate your feelings is to say the word and
then repeat the word with the letters S-C-H-M replacing the real first
letters. Somebody who didn't care about dentists, for instance, could
say "Dentists, schmentists." But only a despicable person like Captain
Sham wouldn't care about the truth. "Truth, schmuth," he said again.
"I think Mr. Poe is more likely to believe the owner of a respectable
sailboat rental place, who went out in the middle of a hurricane to
rescue three ungrateful boat thieves."

"We only stole the boat," Violet said, "to retrieve Aunt Josephine
from her hiding place so she could tell everyone about your terrible
plan."

"But nobody will believe the old woman, either," Captain Sham said
impatiently. "Nobody believes a dead woman."

"Are you blind in botheyes?" Klaus asked. "Aunt Josephine isn't dead!"

Captain Sham smiled again, and looked out at the lake. Just a few
yards away the water was rippling as the Lachrymose Leeches swam
toward Captain Sham's sailboat. After searching every inch of the
Baudelaires' boat and failing to find any food, the leeches had
realized they had been tricked and were once again following the scent
of banana still lingering on Aunt Josephine.

"She's not dead yet"Captain Sham said, in a terrible voice, and took a
step toward her.

"Oh no," she said. Her eyes were wide with fear. "Don't throw me
overboard," she pleaded. "Please!"

"You're not going to reveal my plan to Mr. Poe," Captain Sham said,
taking another step toward the terrified woman, "because you will be
joining your beloved Ike at the bottom of the lake."

"No she won't," Violet said, grabbing a rope. "I will steer us to
shore before you can do anything about it."

"I'll help," Klaus said, running to the back and grabbing the tiller.

"Igal!" Sunny shrieked, which meant something along the lines of "And
I'll guard Aunt Josephine." She crawled in front of the Baude-laires'
guardian and bared her teeth at Captain Sham.

"I promise not to say anything to Mr. Poe!" Aunt Josephine said
desperately. "I'll go someplace and hide away, and never show my face!
You can tell him I'm dead! You can have the fortune! You can have the
children! Just don't throw me to the leeches!"

The Baudelaires looked at their guardian in horror. "You're supposed
to be caring for us," Violet told Aunt Josephine in astonishment, "not
putting us up for grabs!"

Captain Sham paused, and seemed to consider Aunt Josephine's offer.
"You have a point," he said. "I don't necessarily have to kill you.
People just have to thinkthat you're dead."

"I'll change my name!" Aunt Josephine said. "I'll dye my hair! I'll
wear colored contact lenses! And I'll go very, very far away! Nobody
will ever hear from me!"

"But what about us, Aunt Josephine?" Klaus asked in horror. "What
about us?"

"Be quiet, orphan," Captain Sham snapped. The Lachrymose Leeches
reached the sailboat and began tapping on the wooden side. "The adults
are talking. Now, old woman, I wish I could believe you. But you
hadn't been a very trustworthy person."

"Haven't been," Aunt Josephine corrected, wiping a tear from her eye.

"What?" Captain Sham asked.

"You made a grammatical error," Aunt Josephine said. "You said 'But
you hadn't been a very trustworthy person,' but you should have said,
'you haven'tbeen a very trustworthy person.'"

Captain Sham's one shiny eye blinked, and his mouth curled up in a
terrible smile. "Thank you for pointing that out," he said, and took
one last step toward Aunt Josephine. Sunny growled at him, and he
looked down and in one swift gesture moved his peg leg and knocked
Sunny to the other end of his boat. "Let me make sure I completely
understand the grammatical lesson," he said to the Baudelaires'
trembling guardian, as if nothing had happened. "You wouldn't say
'Josephine Anwhistle hadbeen thrown overboard to the leeches,' because
that would be incorrect. But if you said 'Josephine Anwhistle hasbeen
thrown overboard to the leeches,' that would be all right with you."

"Yes," Aunt Josephine said. "I mean no.I mean-"

But Aunt Josephine never got to say what she meant. Captain Sham
faced her and, using both hands, pushed her over the side of the boat.
With a little gasp and a big splash she fell into the waters of Lake
Lachrymose.

"Aunt Josephine!" Violet cried. "Aunt Josephine!"

Klaus leaned over the side of the boat and stretched his hand out as
far as he could. Thanks to her two life jackets, Aunt Josephine was
floating on top of the water, waving her hands in the air as the
leeches swam toward her. But Captain Sham was already pulling at the
ropes of the sail, and Klaus couldn't reach her. "You fiend!"he
shouted at Captain Sham. "You evil fiend!"

"That's no way to talk to your father," Captain Sham said calmly.

Violet tried to tug a rope out of Captain Sham's hand. "Move the
sailboat back!" she shouted. "Turn the boat around!"

"Not a chance," he replied smoothly. "Wave good-bye to the old woman,
orphans. You'll never see her again."

Klaus leaned over as far as he could. "Don't worry, Aunt Josephine!"
he called, but his voice revealed that he was very worried himself.
The boat was already quite a ways from Aunt Josephine, and the orphans
could only see the white of her hands as she waved them over the dark
water.

"She has a chance," Violet said quietly to Klaus as they sailed toward
the dock. "She has those life jackets, and she's a strong swimmer."
"That's true," Klaus said, his voice shaky and sad. "She's lived by
the lake her whole life. Maybe she knows of an escape route."

"Legru," Sunny said quietly, which meant "All we can do is hope."

The three orphans huddled together, shivering in cold and fear, as
Captain Sham sailed the boat by himself. They didn't dare do anything
but hope. Their feelings for Aunt Josephine were all a tumble in their
minds. The Baudelaires had not really enjoyed most of their time with
her not because she cooked horrible cold meals, or chose presents for
them that they didn't like, or always corrected the children's
grammar, but because she was so afraid of everything that she made it
impossible to really enjoy anything at all. And the worst of it was,
Aunt Josephine's fear had made her a bad guardian. A guardian is
supposed to stay with children and keep them safe, but Aunt Josephine
had run away at the first sign of danger. A guardian is supposed to
help children in times of trouble, but Aunt Josephine practically had
to be dragged out of the Curdled Cave when they needed her. And a
guardian is supposed to protect children from danger, but Aunt
Josephine had offered the orphans to Captain Sham in exchange for her
own safety.

But despite all of Aunt Josephine's faults, the orphans still cared
about her. She had taught them many things, even if most of them were
boring. She had provided a home, even if it was cold and unable to
withstand hurricanes. And the children knew that Aunt Josephine, like
the Baudelaires themselves, had experienced some terrible things in
her life. So as their guardian faded from view and the lights of
Damocles Dock approached closer and closer, Violet, Klaus, and Sunny
did not think "Josephine, schmosephine." They thought "We hope Aunt
Josephine is safe."

Captain Sham sailed the boat right up to the shore and tied it
expertly to the dock. "Come along, little idiots," he said, and led
the Baudelaires to the tall metal gate with the glistening spikes on
top, where Mr. Poe was waiting with his handkerchief in his hand and a
look of relief on his face. Next to Mr. Poe was the Brobdingnagian
creature, who gazed at them with a triumphant expression on his or her
face.

"You're safe!" Mr. Poe said. "Thank goodness! We were so worried about
you! When Captain Sham and I reached the An whistle home and saw that
it had fallen into the sea, we thought you were done for!"

"It is lucky my associate told me that they had stolen a sailboat,"
Captain Sham told Mr. Poe. "The boat was nearly destroyed by Hurricane
Herman, and by a swarm of leeches. I rescued them just in time."

"He did not!" Violet shouted. "He threw Aunt Josephine into the lake!
We have to go and rescue her!"

"The children are upset and confused," Captain Sham said, his eye
shining. "As their father, I think they need a good night's sleep."

"He's not our father!" Klaus shouted. "He's Count Olaf, and he's a
murderer! Please, Mr. Poe, alert the police! We have to save Aunt
Josephine!"

"Oh, dear," Mr. Poe said, coughing into his handkerchief. "You
certainly areconfused, Klaus. Aunt Josephine is dead, remember? She
threw herself out the window."

"No, no," Violet said. "Her suicide note had a secret message in it.
Klaus decoded the note and it said 'Curdled Cave.' Actually, it said
'apostrophe Curdled Cave,' but the apostrophe was just to get our
attention."

"You're not making any sense," Mr. Poe said. "What cave? What
apostrophe?"

"Klaus," Violet said, "show Mr. Poe the note."

"You can show it to him in the morning," Captain Sham said, in a
falsely soothing tone. "You need a good night's sleep. My associate
will take you to my apartment while I stay here and finish the
adoption paperwork with Mr. Poe."

"But-" Klaus said.

"But nothing," Captain Sham said. "You're very distraught, which means
'upset.'"

"I knowwhat it means," Klaus said.

"Please listen to us," Violet begged Mr. Poe. "It's a matter of life
or death. Pleasejust take a look at the note."

"You can show it to him," Captain Sham said, his voice rising in
anger, "in the morning.Now please follow my associate to my minivan
and go straight to bed."

"Hold on a minute, Captain Sham," Mr. Poe said. "If it upsets the
children so much, I'll take a look at the note. It will only take a
moment."

"Thank you," Klaus said in relief, and reached into his pocket for the
note. But as soon as hereached inside his face fell in disappointment,
and I'm sure you can guess why. If you place a piece of paper in your
pocket, and then soak yourself in a hurricane, the piece of paper, no
matter how important it is, will turn into a soggy mess. Klaus pulled
a damp lump out of his pocket, and the orphans looked at the remains
of Aunt Josephine's note. You could scarcely tell that it had been a
piece of paper, let alone read the note or the secret it contained.

"This wasthe note," Klaus said, holding it out to Mr. Poe. "You'll
just have to take our word for it that Aunt Josephine was still
alive."

"And she might stillbe alive!" Violet cried. "Please,Mr. Poe, send
someone to rescue her!"

"Oh my, children," Mr. Poe said. "You're so sad and worried. But you
don't have to worry anymore. I have always promised to provide for
you, and I think Captain Sham will do an excellent job of raising you.
He has a steady business and doesn't seem likely to throw himself out
of a window. And it's obvious he cares for you very much-why, he went
out alone, in the middle of a hurricane, to search for you."

"The only thing he cares about," Klaus said bitterly, "is our
fortune."

"Why, that's not true," Captain Sham said. "I don't want a penny of
your fortune. Except, of course, to pay for the sailboat you stole and
wrecked."

Mr. Poe frowned, and coughed into his handkerchief. "Well, that's a
surprising request," he said, "but I suppose that can be arranged.
Now, children, please go to your new home while I make the final
arrangements with Captain Sham. Perhaps we'll have time for breakfast
tomorrow before I head back to the city."

"Please, " Violet cried. "Please,won't you listen to us?"

"Please" Klaus cried. "Please,won't you believe us?"

Sunny did not say anything. Sunny had not said anything for a long
time, and if her siblings hadn't been so busy trying to reason with
Mr. Poe, they would have noticed that she wasn't even looking up to
watch everyone talking. During this whole conversation, Sunny was
looking straight ahead, and if you are a baby this means looking at
people's legs. The leg she was looking at was Captain Sham's. She
wasn't looking at his right leg, which was perfectly normal, but at
his peg leg. She was looking at the stump of dark polished wood,
attached to his left knee with a curved metal hinge, and concentrating
very hard.

It may surprise you to learn that at this moment, Sunny resembled the
famous Greek conqueror Alexander the Great. Alexander the Great lived
more than two thousand years ago, and his last name was not actually
"The Great." "The Great" was something that he forced people to call
him, by bringing a bunch of soldiers into their land and proclaiming
himself king. Besides invading other people's countries and forcing
them to do whatever he said, Alexander the Great was famous for
something called the Gordian Knot. The Gordian Knot was a fancy knot
tied in a piece of rope by a king named Gordius. Gordius said that if
Alexander could untie it, he could rule the whole kingdom. But
Alexander, who was too busy conquering places to learn how to untie
knots, simply drew his sword and cut the Gordian Knot in two. This was
cheating, of course, but Alexander had too many soldiers for Gordius
to argue, and soon everybody in Gordium had to bow down to
You-Know-Who the Great. Ever since then, a difficult problem can be
called a Gordian Knot, and if you solve the problem in a simple way-
even if the way is rude-you are cutting the Gordian Knot.

The problem the Baudelaire orphans were experiencing could certainly
be called a Gordian Knot, because it looked impossible to solve. The
problem, of course, was that Captain Sham's despicable plan was about
to succeed, and the way to solve it was to convince Mr. Poe of what
was really going on. But with Aunt Josephine thrown in the lake, and
her note a ruined lump of wet paper, Violet and Klaus were unable to
convince Mr. Poe of anything. Sunny, however, stared at Captain Sham's
peg leg and thought of a simple, if rude, way of solving the problem.
As all the taller people argued and paid no attention to Sunny, the
littlest Baudelaire crawled as close as she could to the peg leg,
opened her mouth and bit down as hard as she could. Luckily for the
Baudelaires, Sunny's teeth were as sharp as the sword of Alexander the
Great, and Captain Sham's peg leg split right in half with a
crack!that made everybody look down.

As I'm sure you've guessed, the peg leg was fake, and it split open to
reveal Captain Sham's real leg, pale and sweaty from knee to toes. But
it was neither the knee nor the toes that interested everyone. It was
the ankle. For there on the pale and sweaty skin of Captain Sham was
the solution to their problem. By biting the peg leg, Sunny had cut
the Gordian Knot, for as the wooden pieces of fake peg leg fell to the
floor of Damocles Dock, everyone could see a tattoo of an eye.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN

Mr. Poe looked astonished. Violet looked relieved. Klaus looked
assuaged, which is a fancy word for "relieved" that he had learned by
reading a magazine article. Sunny looked triumphant. The person who
looked neither a man nor a woman looked disappointed. And Count
Olaf--it is such a relief to call him by his true name--at first
looked afraid, but in a blink of his one shiny eye, he twisted his
face to make it look as astonished as Mr. Poe's.

"My leg!" Count Olaf cried, in a voice of false joy. "My leg has
grown back! It's amazing! It's wonderful! It's a medical miracle!"

"Oh come now," Mr. Poe said, folding his arms. "That won't work. Even
a child can see that your peg leg was false."

"A child didsee it," Violet whispered to Klaus. "Threechildren, in
fact."

"Well, maybe the peg leg was false," Count Olaf admitted, and took a
step backward. "But I've never seen this tattoo in my life."

"Oh come now," Mr. Poe said again. "That won't work, either. You tried
to hide the tattoo with the peg leg, but now we can see that you are
really Count Olaf."

"Well, maybe the tattoo is mine," Count Olaf admitted, and took
another step backward. "But I'm not this Count Olaf person. I'm
Captain Sham. See, I have a business card here that says so."

"Oh come now," Mr. Poe said yet again. "That won't work. Anyone can go
to a print shop and have cards made that say anything they like."

"Well, maybe I'm not Captain Sham," Count Olaf admitted, "but the
children still belong to me. Josephine said that they did."

"Oh come now," Mr. Poe said for the fourth and final time. "That won't
work. Aunt Josephine left the children to Captain Sham, not to Count
Olaf. And you are Count Olaf, not Captain Sham. So it is once again up
to me to decide who will care for the Baudelaires. I will send these
three youngsters somewhere else, and I will send you to jail. You have
performed your evil deeds for the last time, Olaf. You tried to steal
the Baudelaire fortune by marrying Violet. You tried to steal the
Baudelaire fortune by murdering Uncle Monty."

"And this," Count Olaf growled, "was my greatest plan yet." He reached
up and tore off his eyepatch-which was fake, of course, like his peg
leg-and stared at the Baudelaires with both of his shiny eyes. "I
don't like to brag- actually, why should I lie to you fools anymore?-I
loveto brag, and forcing that stupid old woman to write that note was
really something to brag about. What a ninny Josephine was!"

"She was not a ninny!" Klaus cried. "She was kind and sweet!"

"Sweet?" Count Olaf repeated, with a horrible smile. "Well, at this
very moment the Lachrymose Leeches are probably finding her very sweet
indeed. She might be the sweetest breakfast they ever ate."

Mr. Poe frowned, and coughed into his white handkerchief. "That's
enough of your revolting talk, Olaf," he said sternly. "We've caught
you now, and there's no way you'll be getting away. The Lake
Lachrymose Police Department will be happy to capture a known criminal
wanted for fraud, murder, and the endangerment of children."

"And arson," Count Olaf piped up.

"I said that's enough" Mr. Poe growled. Count Olaf, the Baudelaire
orphans, and even the massive creature looked surprised that Mr. Poe
had spoken so sternly. "You have preyed upon these children for the
last time, and I am making absolutely sure that you are handed over to
the proper authorities. Disguising yourself won't work. Telling lies
won't work. In fact there's nothing at all you can do about your
situation."

"Really?" Count Olaf said, and his filthy lips curved up in a smile.
"I can think of something that I can do."

"And what," said Mr. Poe, "is that?"

Count Olaf looked at each one of the Baudelaire orphans, giving each
one a smile as if the children were tiny chocolates he was saving to
eat for later. Then he smiled at the massive creature, and then,
slowly, he smiled at Mr. Poe. "I can run," he said, and ran. Count
Olaf ran, with the massive creature lumbering behind him, in the
direction of the heavy metal gate.

"Get back here!" Mr. Poe shouted. "Get back here in the name of the
law! Get back here in the name of justice and righteousness! Get back
here in the name of Mulctuary Money Management!"

"We can't just shout at them!" Violet shouted. "Come on! We have to
chase them!"

"I'm not going to allow children to chase after a man like that," Mr.
Poe said, and called out again, "Stop, I say! Stop right there!"

"We can't let them escape!" Klaus cried. "Come on, Violet! Come on,
Sunny!"

"No, no, this is no job for children," Mr. Poe said. "Wait here with
your sisters, Klaus. I'll retrieve them. They won't get away from Mr.
Poe. You, there! Stop!"

"But we can't wait here!" Violet cried. "We have to get into a
sailboat and look for Aunt Josephine! She may still be alive!"

"You Baudelaire children are under my care," Mr. Poe said firmly. "I'm
not going to let small children sail around unaccompanied."

"But if we hadn't sailed unaccompanied," Klaus pointed out, "we'd be
in Count Olaf's clutches by now!"

"That's not the point," Mr. Poe said, and began to walk quickly toward
Count Olaf and the creature. "The point is-"

But the children didn't hear the point over the loud slam!of the tall
metal gate. The creature had slammed it shut just as Mr. Poe had
reached it.

"Stop immediately!" Mr. Poe ordered, calling through the gate. "Come
back here, you unpleasant person!" He tried to open the tall gate and
found it locked. "It's locked!" he cried to the children. "Where is
the key? We must find the key!"

The Baudelaires rushed to the gate but stopped as they heard a
jingling sound. "I have the key," said Count Olaf's voice, from the
other side of the gate. "But don't worry. I'll see you soon, orphans.
Very soon."

"Open this gate immediately!" Mr. Poe shouted, but of course nobody
opened the gate. He shook it and shook it, but the spiky metal gate
never opened. Mr. Poe hurried to a phone booth and called the police,
but the children knew that by the time help arrived Count Olaf would
be long gone. Utterly exhausted and more than utterly miserable, the
Baudelaire orphans sank to the ground, sitting glumly in the very same
spot where we found them at the beginning of this story.

In the first chapter, you will remember, the Baudelaires were sitting
on their suitcases, hoping that their lives were about to get a little
bit better, and I wish I could tell you, here at the end of the story,
that it was so. I wish I could write that Count Olaf was captured as
he tried to flee, or that Aunt Josephine came swimming up to Damocles
Dock, having miraculously escaped from the Lachrymose Leeches. But it
was not so. As the children sat on the damp ground, Count Olaf was
already halfway across the lake and would soon be on board a train,
disguised as a rabbi to fool the police, and I'm sorry to tell you
that he was already concocting another scheme to steal the Baudelaire
fortune. And we can never know exactly what was happening to Aunt
Josephine as the children sat on the dock, unable to help her, but I
will say that eventually-about the time when the Baudelaire orphans
were forced to attend a miserable boarding school-two fishermen found
both of Aunt Josephine's life jackets, all in tatters and floating
alone in the murky waters of Lake Lachrymose.

In most stories, as you know, the villain would be defeated, there
would be a happy ending, and everybody would go home knowing the moral
of the story. But in the case of the Baudelaires everything was wrong.
Count Olaf, the villain, had not succeeded with his evil plan, but he
certainly hadn't been defeated, either. You certainly couldn't say
that there was a happy ending. And the Baudelaires could not go home
knowing the moral of the story, for the simple reason that they could
not go home at all. Not only had Aunt Josephine's house fallen into
the lake, but the Baudelaires' real home-the house where they had
lived with their parents-was just a pile of ashes in a vacant lot, and
they couldn't go back there no matter how much they wanted to.

But even if they could go home it would be difficult for me to tell
you what the moral of the story is. In some stories, it's easy. The
moral of "The Three Bears," for instance, is "Never break into someone
else's house." The moral of "Snow White" is "Never eat apples." The
moral of World War One is "Never assassinate Archduke Ferdinand." But
Violet, Klaus, and Sunny sat on the dock and watched the sun come up
over Lake Lachrymose and wondered exactly what the moral was of their
time with Aunt Josephine. The expression "It dawned on them," which I
am about to use, does not have anything to do with the sunlight
spreading out over Damocles Dock. "It dawned on them" simply means
"They figured something out," and as the Baudelaire orphans sat and
watched the dock fill with people as the business of the day began,
they figured out something that was very important to them. It dawned
on them that unlike Aunt Josephine, who had lived up in that house,
sad and alone, the three children had one another for comfort and
support over the course of their miserable lives. And while this did
not make them feel entirely safe, or entirely happy, it made them feel
appreciative.

"Thank you, Klaus," Violet said appreciatively, "for figuring out that
note. And thank you, Sunny, for stealing the keys to the sailboat. If
it weren't for the two of you we would now be in Count Olaf's
clutches."

"Thank you, Violet," Klaus said appreciatively, "for thinking of the
peppermints to gain us some time. And thank you, Sunny, for biting the
peg leg just at the right moment. If it weren't for the two of you, we
would now be doomed."

"Pilums," Sunny said appreciatively, and her siblings understood at
once that she was thanking Violet for inventing the signaling device,
and thanking Klaus for reading the atlas and guiding them to Curdled
Cave.

They leaned up against one another appreciatively, and small smiles
appeared on their damp and anxious faces. They had each other. I'm not
sure that "The Baudelaires had each other" is the moral of this story,
but to the three siblings it was enough. To have each other in the
midst of their unfortunate lives felt like having a sailboat in the
middle of a hurricane, and to the Baudelaire orphans this felt very
fortunate indeed.


To My Kind Editor,

I am writing to you from the Paltryville Town Hall, where I have
convinced the mayor to allow me inside the eye-shaped office of Dr.
Orwell in order to further investigate what happened to the Baudelaire
orphans while they were living in the area.

Next Friday, a black jeep will be in the northwest corner of the
parking lot of the Orion Observatory. Break into it. In the glove
compartment, you should find my description of this frightening
chapter in the Baudelaires' lives, entitled THE MISERABLE MILL, as
well as some information on hypnosis, a surgical mask, and sixty-eight
sticks of gum. I have also included the blueprint of the pincher
machine, which I believe Mr. Helquist will find useful for his
illustrations.

Remember, you are my last hope that the tales of the Baudelaire
orphans can finally be told to the general public.

With all due respect,

Lemony Snicket

