Hocus Pocus

by Kurt Vonnegut


EDITOR'S NOTE

The author of this book did not have access to writing paper of
uniform size and quality. He wrote in a library housing some eight
hundred thousand volumes of interest to no one else. Most had never
been read and probably never would be read, so there was nothing to
stop him from tearing out their blank endpapers for stationery. This
he did not do. Why he did not do this is not known. Whatever the
reason, he wrote this book in pencil on everything from brown wrapping
paper to the backs of business cards. The unconventional lines
separating passages within chapters indicate where one scrap ended and
the next began. The shorter the passage, the smaller the scrap.

One can speculate that the author, fishing through trash for anything
to write on, may have hoped to establish a reputation for humility or
insanity, since he was facing trial. It is equally likely, though,
that he began this book impulsively, having no idea it would become a
book, scribbling words on a scrap which happened to be right at hand.
It could be that he found it congenial, then, to continue on from
scrap to scrap, as though each were a bottle for him to fill. When he
filled one up, possibly, no matter what its size, he could satisfy
himself that he had written everything there was to write about this
or that.

He numbered all the pages so there could be no doubt about their being
sequential, nor about his hope that someone, undaunted by their
disreputable appearance, would read them as a book. He in fact says
here and there, with increasing confidence as he nears the end, that
what he is doing is writing a book.

There are several drawings of a tombstone. The author made only one
such drawing. The others are tracings of the original, probably made
by superimposing translucent pieces of paper and pressing them against
a sunlit library windowpane. He wrote words on the face of each burial
marker, and in one case simply a question mark. These did not
reproduce well on a printed page. So they have been set in type
instead.

The author himself is responsible for the capitalization of certain
words whose initial letters a meticulous editor might prefer to see in
lowercase. So, too, did Eugene Debs Hartke choose for reasons
unexplained to let numbers stand for themselves, except at the heads
of sentences, rather than put them into words: for example, "2"
instead of "two." He may have felt that numbers lost much of their
potency when diluted by an alphabet.

To virtually all of his idiosyncrasies I, after much thought, have
applied what another author once told me was the most sacred word in a
great editor's vocabulary. That word is "stet."

K.V.


This work of pure fiction is dedicated to the

memory of

EUGENE VICTOR Dens

1855¡X1926

"While there is a lower class I am in it. While there is a criminal
element I am of it. While there is a soul in prison I am not free."


1

My name is Eugene Debs Hartke, and I was born in 1940. I was named at
the behest of my maternal grandfather, Benjamin Wills, who was a
Socialist and an Atheist, and nothing but a groundskeeper at Butler
University, in Indianapolis, Indiana, in honor of Eugene Debs of Terre
Haute, Indiana. Debs was a Socialist and a Pacifist and a Labor
Organizer who ran several times for the Presidency of the United
States of America, and got more votes than has any other candidate
nominated by a third party in the history of this counDebs died in
1926, when I was a negative 14 years of age.

The year is 2001 now.

If all had gone the way a lot of people thought it would, Jesus Christ
would have been among us again, and the American flag would have been
planted on Venus and Mars.

No such luck!

At least the World will end, an event anticipated with great joy by
many. It will end very soon, but not in the year 2000, which has come
and gone. From that I conclude that God Almighty is not heavily into
Numerology.


Grandfather Benjamin Wills died in 1948, when I was a pIus 8 years of
age, but not before he made sure that

I knew by heart the most famous words uttered by

Debs, which are:

"While there is a lower class I am in it. While there is a criminal
element I am of it. While there is a soul in prison I am not free."


I, Debs' namesake, however, became anything but a bleeding heart. From
the time I was 21 until I was 35 1 was a professional soldier, a
Commissioned Officer in the United States Army. During those 14 years
I would have killed Jesus Christ Himself or Herself or Itself or
Whatever, if ordered to do so by a superior officer. At the abrupt and
humiliating and dishonorable end of the Vietnam War, I was a
Lieutenant Colonel, with I ,000s and 1 ,000s of my own inferiors.


During that war, which was about nothing but the ammunition business,
there was a microscopic possibility, I suppose, that I called in a
white-phosphorus barrage or a napalm air strike on a returning Jesus
Christ.


I never wanted to be a professional soldier, although I turned out to
be a good one, if there can be such a thing. The idea that I should go
to West Point came up as unexpectedly as the finale of the Vietnam
War, near the end of my senior year in high school. I was all set to
go to the University of Michigan, and take courses in English and
History and Political Science, and work on the student daily paper
there in preparation for a career as a journalist.

But all of a sudden my father, who was a chemical engineer involved in
making plastics with a half-life of 50,000 years, and as full of
excrement as a Christmas turkey, said I should go to West Point
instead. He had never been in the military himself. During World War
II, he was too valuable as a civilian deep-thinker about chemicals to
be put in a soldier suit and turned into a suicidal, homicidal
imbecile in 13 weeks.

I had already been accepted by the University of Michigan, when this
offer to me of an appointment to the United States Military Academy
came out of the blue. The offer arrived at a low point in my father's
life, when he needed something to boast about which would impress our
simple-minded neighbors. They would think an appointment to West Point
was a great prize, like being picked for a professional baseball team.

So he said to me, as I used to say to infantry replacements fresh off
the boat or plane in Vietnam, "This is a great opportunity."


What I would really like to have been, given a perfect world, is a
jazz pianist. I mean jazz. I don't mean rock and roll. I mean the
never-the-same-way-twice music the American black people gave the
world. I played piano in my own all-white band in my all-white high
school in Midland City, Ohio. We called ourselves "The Soul
Merchants."

How good were we? We had to play white people's popular music, or
nobody would have hired us. But every so often we would cut loose with
jazz anyway.

Nobody else seemed to notice the difference, but we sure did. We fell
in love with ourselves. We were in ecstasy.


Father should never have made me go to West Point. Never mind what he
did to the environment with his nonbiodegradable plastics. Look what
he did to me! What a boob he was! And my mother agreed with every
decision he ever made, which makes her another blithering nincompoop.

They were both killed 20 years ago in a freak accident in a gift shop
on the Canadian side of Niagara Falls, which the Indians in this
valley used to call "Thunder Beaver," when the roof fell in.


There are no dirty words in this book, except for "hell" and "God," in
case someone is fearing that an innocent child might see 1. The
expression I will use here and there for the end of the Vietnam War,
for example, will be: "when the excrement hit the air-conditioning."

Perhaps the only precept taught me by Grandfather Wills that I have
honored all my adult life is that profanity and obscenity entitle
people who don't want unpleasant information to close their ears and
eyes to you.


The more alert soldiers who served under me in Vietnam would comment
in some amazement that I never used profanity, which made me unlike
anybody else they had ever met in the Army. They might ask if this was
because 1 was religious.

I would reply that religion had nothing to do with it. I am in fact
pretty much an Atheist like my mother's father, although I kept that
to myself. Why argue some- body else out of the expectation of some
sort of an Afterlife?

"I don't use profanity," I would say, "because your life and the lives
of those around you may depend on your understanding what I tell you.
OK? OK?"


I resigned my commission in 1975, after the excrement hit the
air-conditioning, not failing, however, to father a son on my way
home, unknowingly, during a brief stopover in the Philippines. I
thought surely that the subsequent mother, a young female war
correspondent for The Des Moines Register, was using foolproof birth
control.

Wrong again!

Booby traps everywhere.


The biggest booby trap Fate set for me, though, was a pretty and
personable young woman named Margaret Patton, who allowed me to woo
and marry her soon after my graduation from West Point, and then had 2
children by me without telling me that there was a powerful strain of
insanity on her mother's side of her famSo then her mother, who was
living with us, went insane, and then she herself went insane. Our
children, moreover, had every reason to suspect that they, too, might
go crazy in middle age.

Our children, full-grown now, can never forgive us for reproducing.
What a mess.


I realize that my speaking of my first and only wife as something as
inhuman as a booby trap risks my seeming to be yet another infernal
device. But many other women have had no trouble relating to me as a
person, and ardently, too, and my interest in them has gone well
beyond the merely mechanical. Almost invariably, I have been as
enchanted by their souls, their intellects, and the stories of their
lives as by their amorous propensities.

But after I came home from the Vietnam War, and before either Margaret
or her mother had shown me and the children and the neighbors great
big symptoms of their inherited craziness, that mother-daughter team
treated me like some sort of boring but necessary electrical appliance
like a vacuum cleaner.


Good things have also happened unexpectedly, "manna from Heaven" you
might want to call them, but not in such quantities as to make life a
bowl of cherries or anything approaching that. Right after my war,
when I had no idea what to do with the rest of my life, 1 ran into a
former commanding officer of mine who had become President of
Tarkington College, in Scipio, New York. I was then only 35, and my
wife was still sane, and my mother-in-law was only slightly crazy. He
offered me a teaching job, which I accepted.

I could accept that job with a clear conscience, despite my lack of
academic credentials beyond a mere BS Degree from West Point, since
all the students at larkington were learning-disabled in some way, or
plain stupid or comatose or whatever. No matter what the subject, my
old CO assured me, I would have little trouble keeping ahead of them.

The particular subject he wanted me to teach, what's more, was 1 in
which I had excelled at the Academy, which was Physics.

The greatest stroke of luck for me, the biggest chunk of manna from
Heaven, was that Tarkington had need of somebody to play the Lutz
Carillon, the great family of bells at the top of the tower of the
college library, where I am writing now.

I asked my old CO if the bells were swung by ropes. He said they used
to be, but that they had been electrified and were played by means of
a keyboard now.

"What does the keyboard look like?" I said.

"Like a piano," he said.

I had never played bells. Very few people have that clanging
opportunity. But I could play a piano. So I said, "Shake hands with
your new carillonneur."


The happiest moments in my life, without question, were when I played
the Lutz Carillon at the start and end of every day.


I went to work at Tarkington 25 years ago, and have lived in this
beautiful valley ever since. This is home.

I have been a teacher here. I was a Warden for a little while, after
Tarkington College officially became Tarkington State Reformatory in
June of 1999, 20 months ago.

Now I myself am a prisoner here, but with pretty much the run of the
place. I haven't been convicted of anything yet. I am awaiting trial,
which I guess will take place in Rochester, for supposedly having
masterminded the mass prison break at the New York State Maximum
Security Adult Correctional Institution at Athena, across the lake
from here.

It turns out that I also have tuberculosis, and my poor, addled wife
Margaret and her mother have been put by court order into a lunatic
asylum in Batavia,


New York, something I had never had the guts to do. I am so powerless
and despised now that the man I am named after, Eugene Debs, if he
were still alive, might at last be somewhat fond of me.


2

In more optimistic times, when it was not widely understood that human
beings were killing the planet with the by-products of their own
ingenuity and that a new Ice Age had begun in any case, the generic
name for the sort of horse-drawn covered wagon that carried freight
and settlers across the prairies of what was to become the United
States of America, and eventually across the Rocky Mountains to the
Pacific Ocean, was "Conestoga"¡Xsince the first of these were built in
the Conestoga Valley of Pennsylvania.

They kept the pioneers supplied with cigars, among other things, so
that cigars nowadays, in the year 2001, are still called "stogies"
sometimes, which is short for "Conestoga."

By 1830, the sturdiest and most popular of these wagons were in fact
made by the Mohiga Wagon Company right here in Scipio, New York, at
the pinched waist of Lake Mohiga, the deepest and coldest and
westernmost of the long and narrow Finger Lakes. So sophisticated
cigar-smokers might want to stop calling their stinkbombs "stogies"
and call them "mogies" or "higgies" instead.


The founder of the Mohiga Wagon Company was Aaron Tarkington, a
brilliant inventor and manufacturer who nevertheless could not read or
write. He now would be identified as a blameless inheritor of the
genetic defect known as dyslexia. He said of himself that he was like
the Emperor Charlemagne, "too busy to learn to read and write." He was
not too busy, however, to have his wife read to him for 2 hours every
evening. He had an excellent memory, for he delivered weekly lectures
to the workmen at the factory that were laced with lengthy quotations
from Shakespeare and Homer and the Bible, and on and on.

He sired 4 children, a son and 3 daughters, all of whom could read and
write. But they still carried the gene of dyslexia, which would
disqualify several of their own descendants from getting very far in
conventional schemes of education. Two of Aaron Tarkington's children
were so far from being dyslexic, in fact, as to themselves write
books, which I have read only now, and which nobody, probably, will
ever read again. Aaron's only son, Elias, wrote a technical account of
the construction of the Onondaga Canal, which connected the northern
end of Lake Mohiga to the Erie Canal just south of Rochester. And the
youngest daughter, Felicia, wrote a novel called Carpathia, about a
headstrong, high-born young woman in the Mohiga Valley who fell in
love with a half-Indian lock-tender on that same canal.


That canal is all filled in and paved over now, and is Route 53, which
forks at the head of the lake, where the locks used to be. One fork
leads southwest through farm country to Scipio. The other leads
southeast through the perpetual gloom of the Iroquois National Forest
to the bald hilltop crowned by the battlements of the New York State
Maximum Security Adult Correctional Institution at Athena, a hamlet
directly across the lake from Scipio.

Bear with me. This is history. I am trying to explain how this valley,
this verdant cul-de-sac, got to be what it is today.


All 3 of Aaron Tarkington's daughters married into prosperous and
enterprising families in Cleveland, New York, and Wilmington,
Delaware¡Xinnocently making the threat of dyslexia pandemic in an
emerging ruling class of bankers and industrialists, largely displaced
in my time by Germans, Koreans, Italians, English, and, of course,
Japanese.

The son of Aaron, Elias, remained in Scipio and took over his father's
properties, adding to them a brewery and a steam-driven carpet
factory, the first such in the state. There was no water power in
Scipio, whose industrial prosperity until the introduction of steam
was based not on cheap energy and locally available raw materials but
on inventiveness and high standards of workmanship.

Elias Tarkington never married. He was severely wounded at the age of
54 while a civilian observer at the Battle of Gettysburg, top hat and
all. He was there to see the debuts of 2 of his inventions, a mobile
field kitchen and a pneumatic recoil mechanism for heavy artillery.
The field kitchen, incidentally, with slight modifications, would
later be adopted by the Barnum & Bailey Circus, and then by the German
Army during World War I.


Elias Tarkington was a tall and skinny man with chin whiskers and a
stovepipe hat. He was shot through the right chest at Gettysburg, but
not fatally.

The man who shot him was I of the few Confederate soldiers to reach
the Union lines during Pickett's Charge. That Johnny Reb died in
ecstasy among his enemies, believing that he had shot Abraham Lincoln.
A crumbling newspaper account I have found here in what used to be the
college library, which is now the prison library, gives his last words
as follows: "Go home, Bluebellies. Old Satan's daid."

During my 3 years in Vietnam, I certainly heard plenty of last words
by dying American footsoldiers. Not 1 of them, however, had illusions
that he had somehow accomplished something worthwhile in the process
of making the Supreme Sacrifice.

One boy of only 18 said to me while he was dying and I was holding him
in my arms, "Dirty joke, dirty joke."

3

He has Tarkington, the severely wounded Abraham Lincoln look-alike,
was brought home in 1 of his own wagons to Scipio, to his estate
overlooking the town and lake.

He was not well educated, and was more a mechanic than a scientist,
and so spent his last 3 years trying to invent what anyone familiar
with Newton's Laws would have known was an impossibility, a
perpetual-motion machine. He had no fewer than 27 contraptions built,
which he foolishly expected to go on running, after he had given them
an initial spin or whack, until Judgment Day.

I found 19 of those stubborn, mocking machines in the attic of what
used to be their inventor's mansion, which in my time was the home of
the College President, about a year after I came to work at
Tarkington. I brought them back downstairs and into the 20th Century.
Some of my students and I cleaned them up and restored any parts that
had deteriorated during the intervening 100 years. At the least they
were exquisite jewelry, with gamets and amethysts for bearings, with
arms and legs of exotic woods, with tumbling balls of ivory, with
chutes and counterweights of silver. It was as though dying Elias
hoped to overwhelm science with the magic of precious materials.

The longest my students and I could get the best of them to run was 51
seconds. Some eternity!


To me, and I passed this on to my students, the restored devices
demonstrated not only how quickly anything on Earth runs down without
steady infusions of energy. They reminded us, too, of the
craftsmanship no longer practiced in the town below. Nobody down there
in our time could make things that cunning and beautiful.

Yes, and we took the 10 machines we agreed were the most beguiling,
and we put them on permanent exhibit in the foyer of this library
underneath a sign whose words can surely be applied to this whole
ruined planet nowadays:


THE COMPLICATED FUTILITY OF IGNORANCE




I have discovered from reading old newspapers and letters and diaries
from back then that the men who built the machines for Elias
Tarkington knew from the first that they would never work, whatever
the reason. Yet what love they lavished on the materials that
comprised them! How is this for a definition of high art:

"Making the most of the raw materials of futility"?


Still another perpetual-motion machine envisioned by Elias Tarkington
was what his Last Will and Testament called "The Mohiga Valley Free
Institute." Upon his death, this new school would take possession of
his 3,000-hectare estate above Scipio, plus half the shares in the
wagon company, the carpet company, and the brewery. The other half was
already owned by his sisters far away. On his deathbed he predicted
that Scipio would I day be a great metropolis and that its wealth
would transform his little college into a university to rival Harvard
and Oxford and Heidelberg.

It was to offer a free college education to persons of either sex, and
of any age or race or religion, living within 40 miles of Scipio.
Those from farther away would pay a modest fee. In the beginning, it
would have only 1 full-time employee, the President. The teachers
would be recruited right here in Scipio. They would take a few hours
off from work each week, to teach what they knew. The chief engineer
at the wagon company, for example, whose name was Andr? Lutz, was a
native of Liege, Belgium, and had served as an apprentice to a bell
founder there. He would teach Chemistry. His French wife would teach
French and Watercolor Painting. The brewmaster at the brewery, Hermann
Shultz, a native of Leipzig, would teach Botany and German and the
flute. The Episcopalian priest, Dr. Alan Clewes, a graduate of
Harvard, would teach Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and the Bible. The dying
man's physician, Dalton Polk, would teach Biology and Shakespeare, and
so on.

And it came to pass.

In 1869 the new college enrolled its first class, 9 students in all,
and all from right here in Scipio. Four were of ordinary college age.
One was a Union veteran who had lost his legs at Shiloh. One was a
former black slave 40 years old. One was a spinster 82 years old.

The first President was only 26 years old, a schoolteacher from
Athena, 2 kilometers by water from Scipio. There was no prison over
there back then, but only a slate quarry and a sawmill and a few
subsistence farms. His name was John Peck. He was a cousin of the
Tarkingtons'. His branch of the family, however, was and remains
unhampered by dyslexia. He has numerous descendants in the present
day, 1 of whom, in fact, is a speech writer for the Vice-President of
the United States.

Young John Peck and his wife and 2 children and his mother-in-law
arrived at Scipio by rowboat, with Peck and his wife at the oars,
their children seated in the stern, and their luggage and the
mother-in-law in another boat they towed behind.

They took up residence on the third floor of what had been Elias
Tarkington's mansion. The rooms on the first 2 floors would be
classrooms, a library, which was already a library with 280 volumes
collected by the Tarkingtons, study halls, and a dining room. Many
treasures from the past were taken up to the attic to make room for
the new activities. Among these were the failed perpetual-motion
machines. They would gather dust and cobwebs until 1978, when I found
them up there, and realized what they were, and brought them down the
stairs again.


One week before the first class was held, which was in Latin, taught
by the Episcopalian priest Alan Clewes, Andr? Lutz the Belgian arrived
at the mansion with 3 wagons carrying a very heavy cargo, a carillon
consisting of 32 bells. He had cast them on his own time and at his
own expense in the wagon factory's foundry. They were made from
mingled Union and Confederate rifle barrels and cannonballs and
bayonets gathered up after the Battle of Gettysburg. They were the
first bells and surely the last bells ever to be cast in Scipio.

Nothing, in my opinion, will ever again be cast in Scipio. No
industrial arts of any sort will ever again be practiced here.


Andr? Lutz gave the new college all those bells, even though there was
no place to hang them. He said he did it because he was so sure that
it would 1 day be a great university with a bell tower and everything.
He was dying of emphysema as a result of the fumes from molten metals
that he had been breathing since he was 10 years old. He had no time
to wait for a place to hang the most wonderful consequence of his
having been alive for a little while, which was all those bells,
bells, bells.

They were no surprise. They had been 18 months in the making. The
founders whose work he supervised had shared his dreams of immortality
as they made things as impractical and beautiful as bells, bells,
bells.

So all the bells but I from a middle octave were slathered with grease
to prevent their rusting and stored in 4 ranks in the estate's great
barn, 200 meters from the mansion. The I bell that was going to get to
sing at once was installed in the cupola of the mansion, with its rope
running all the way down to the first floor. It would call people to
classes and, if need be, also serve as a fire alarm.

The rest of the bells, it turned out, would slumber in the loft for 30
years, until 1899, when they were hanged as a family, the 1 from the
cupola included, on axles in the belfry of the tower of a splendid
library given to the school by the Moellenkamp family of Cleveland.

The Moellenkamps were also Tarkingtons, since the founder of their
fortune had married a daughter of the illiterate Aaron Tarkington.
Eleven of them so far had been dyslexic, and they had all gone to
college in Scipio, since no other institution of higher learning would
take them in.


The first Moellenkamp to graduate from here was Henry, who enrolled in
1875, when he was 19, and when the school was only 6 years old. It was
at that time that its name was changed to Tarkington College. I have
found the crumbling minutes of the Board of Trustees meeting at which
that name change was made. Three of the 6 trustees were men who had
married daughters of Aaron Tarkington, 1 of them the grandfather of
Henry Moellenkamp. The other 3 trustees were the Mayor of Scipio, and
a lawyer who looked after the Tarkington daughters' interests in the
valley, and the area Congressman, who was surely the sisters' faithful
servant, too, since they were partners with the college in his
district's most important industries.

And according to the minutes, which fell apart in my hands as I read
them, it was the grandfather of young Henry Moellenkamp who proposed
the name change, saying that "The Mohiga Valley Free Institute"
sounded too much like a poorhouse or a hospital. It is my guess that
he would not have minded having the place sound like a catchment for
the poor, if only he had not suffered the misfortune of having his own
grandson go there.


It was in that same year, 1875, that work began across the lake from
Scipio, on a hilltop above Athena, on a prison camp for young
criminals from big-city slums. It was believed that fresh air and the
wonders of

Nature would improve their souls and bodies to the point that they
would find it natural to be good citizens.


When I came to work at Tarkington, there were only 300 students, a
number that hadn't changed for 50 years. But the rustic work-camp
across the lake had become a brutal fortress of iron and masonry on a
naked hilltop, the New York State Maximum Security Adult Correctional
Institution at Athena, keeping 5,000 of the state's worst criminals
under lock and key.

Two years ago, Tarkington still had only 300 students, but the
population of the prison, under hideously overcrowded conditions, had
grown to 10,000. And then, 1 cold winter's night, it became the scene
of the biggest prison break in American history. Until then, nobody
had ever escaped from Athena.

Suddenly, everybody was free to leave, and to take a weapon from the
prison armory, too, if he had use for 1. The lake between the prison
and the little college was frozen solid, as easily traversed as the
parking lot of a great shopping mall.

What next?


Yes, and by the time Andr? Lutz's bells were at last made to sing as a
carillon, Tarkington College had not only a new library but luxurious
dormitories, a science building, an art building, a chapel, a theater,
a dining hall, an administration building, 2 new buildings of
classrooms, and athletic facilities that were the envy of the
institutions with which it had begun to compete in track and fencing
and swimming and baseball, which were Hobart, the University of
Rochester, Cornell, Union, Amherst, and Bucknell.

These structures bore the names of wealthy families as grateful as the
Moelhenkamps for all the college had managed to do for offspring of
theirs whom conventional colleges had deemed ineducable. Most were
unrelated to the Moehlenkamps or to anyone who carried the Tarkington
gene of dyslexia. Nor were the young they sent to Tarkington
necessarily troubled by dyslexia. All sorts of different things were
wrong with them, including an inability to write legibly with pen and
ink, although what they tried to write down made perfect sense, and
stammering so severe as to prevent their saying a word in class, and
petit mal, which caused their minds to go perfectly blank for seconds
or minutes anywhere, anytime, and so on.

It was simply the Moellenkamps who first challenged the new little
college to do what it could for a seemingly hopeless case of
plutocratic juvenile incapacity, namely Henry. Not only would Henry
graduate with honors from Tarkinglon. He would go on to Oxford, taking
with him a male companion who read aloud to him and wrote down
thoughts Henry could only express orally. Henry would become 1 of the
most brilliant speakers in a golden age of American purple, bow-wow
oratory, and serve as a Congressman and then a United States Senator
from Ohio for 36 years.


That same Henry Moellenkamp was author of the lyrics to one of the
most popular turn-of-the-century ballads, "Mary, Mary, Where Have You
Gone?"

The melody of that ballad was composed by Henry's friend Paul Dresser,
brother of the novelist Theodore Dreiser. This was 1 of the rare
instances in which Dresser set another man's words to music instead of
his own. And then Henry appropriated that tune and wrote, or rather
dictated, new words which sentimentalized student life in this valley.

Thus was "Mary, Mary, Where Have You Gone?" transmogrifled into the
alma mater of this campus until it became a penitentiary 2 years ago.

History.


Accident after accident has made Tarkington what it is today. Who
would dare to predict what it will be in 2021, only 20 years from now?
The 2 prime movers in the Universe are Time and Luck.

As the tag line of my favorite dirty joke would have it: "Keep your
hat on. We could wind up miles from here."


If Henry Moellenkamp had not come out of his mother's womb dyslexic,
Tarkington College wouldn't even have been called Tarkington College.
It would have gone on being The Mohiga Valley Free Institute, which
would have died right along with the wagon factory and the carpet
factory and the brewery when the railroads and highways connecting the
East and West were built far to the north and south of Scipio¡Xso as
not to bridge the lake, so as not to have to penetrate the deep and
dark virgin hardwood forest, now the Iroquois National Forest, to the
east and south of here.


If Henry Moellenkamp hadn't come out of his mother's womb dyslexic,
and if that mother hadn't been a Tarkington and so known about the
little college on Lake Mohiga, this library would never have been
built and ifiled with 800,000 bound volumes. When I was a professor
here, that was 70,000 more bound volumes than Swarthmore College had!
Among small colleges, this library used to be second only to the I at
Oberlin, which had 1,000,000 bound volumes.

So what is this structure in which I sit now, thanks to Time and Luck?
It is nothing less, friends and neighbors, than the greatest prison
library in the history of crime and punishment!

It is very lonely in here. Hello? Hello?


I might have said the same sort of thing back when this was an
800,000-bound-volume college library: "It is very lonely in here.
Hello? Hello?"


I have just looked up Harvard University. It has 13,000,000 bound
volumes now. What a read!

And almost every book written for or about the ruling class.


If Henry Moellenkamp hadn't come out of his mother's womb dyslexic,
there would never have been a tower in which to hang the Lutz
Carillon.

Those bells might never have gotten to reverberate in the valley or
anywhere. They probably would have been melted up and made back into
weapons during World War I.


If Henry Moellenkamp had not come out of his mother's womb dyslexic,
these heights above Scipio might have been all darkness on the cold
winter night 2 years ago, with Lake Mohiga frozen hard as a parking
lot, when 10,000 prisoners at Athena were suddenly set free.

Instead, there was a little galaxy of beckoning lights up here.


4

Regardless of whether Henry Moellenkamp came out of his mother's womb
dyslexic or not, I was born in Wilmington, Delaware, 18 months before
this country joined the fighting in World War II. I have not seen
Wilmington since. That is where they keep my birth certificate. I was
the only child of a housewife and, as I've said, a chemical engineer.
My father was then employed by E. I. Du Pont de Nemours & Company, a
manufacturer of high explosives, among other things.

When I was 2 years old, we moved to Midland City, Ohio, where a
washing-machine company named Robo-Magic Corporation was beginning to
make bomb-release mechanisms and swivel mounts for machine guns on B-I
7 bombers. The plastics industry was then in its infancy, and Father
was sent to Robo-Magic to determine what synthetic materials from Du
Pont could be used in the weapons systems in place of metal, in order
to make them lighter.

By the time the war was over, the company had gotten out of the
washing-machine business entirely, had changed its name to Barrytron,
Limited, and was making weapon, airplane, and motor vehicle parts
composed of plastics it had developed on its own. My father had become
the company's Vice-President in Charge of Research and Development.

When I was about 17, Du Pont bought Barrytron in order to capture
several of its patents. One of the plastics Father had helped to
develop, I remember, had the ability to scatter radar signals, so that
an airplane clad in it would look like a flock of geese to our
enemies.


This material, which has since been used to make virtually
indestructible skateboards and crash helmets and skis and motorcycle
fenders and so on, was an excuse, when I was a boy, for increasing
security precautions at Barrytron. To keep Communists from finding out
how it was made, a single fence topped with barbed wire was no longer
adequate. A second fence was put outside that one, and the space
between them was patrolled around the clock by humorless, jack-booted
armed guards with lean and hungry Dobermans.


When Du Pont took over Barrytron, the double fence, the Dobennans, my
father and all, I was a high school senior, all set to go to the
University of Michigan to learn how to be a journalist, to serve John
Q. Public's right to know. Two members of my 6-piece band, The Soul
Merchants, the clarinet and the string bass, were also going to
Michigan.

We were going to stick together and go on making music at Ann Arbor.
Who knows? We might have become so popular that we went on world tours
and made great fortunes, and been superstars at peace rallies and
love-ins when the Vietnam War came along.


Cadets at West Point did not make music. The musicians in the dance
band and the marching band were Regular Army enlisted men, members of
the servant class.

They were under orders to play music as written, note for note, and
never mind how they felt about the music or about anything.


For that matter, there wasn't any student publication at West Point.
So never mind how the cadets felt about anything. Not interesting.


I was fine, but all kinds of things were going wrong with my father's
life. Du Pont was looking him over, as they were looking over
everybody at Barrytron, deciding whether to keep him on or not. He was
also having a love affair with a married woman whose husband caught
him in the act and beat him up.

This was a sensitive subject with my parents, naturally, so I never
discussed it with them. But the story was all over town, and Father
had a black eye. He didn't play any sports, so he had to make up a
story about falling down the basement stairs. Mother weighed about 90
kilograms by then, and berated him all the time about his having sold
all his Barrytron stock 2 years too soon. If he had hung on to it
until the Du Pont takeover, he would have had $1,000,000, back when it
meant something to be a millionaire. If I had been learning-disabled,
he could easily have afforded to send me to Tarkington.

Unlike me, he was the sort of man who had to be in extremis in order
to commit adultery. According to a story I heard from enemies at high
school, Father had done the jumping-out-the-window thing,
hippity-hopping like Peter Cottontail across backyards with his pants
around his ankles, and getting bitten by a dog, and getting tangled up
in a clothesline, and all the rest of it. That could have been an
exaggeration. I never asked.


I myself was deeply troubled by our little family's image problem,
which was complicated when Mother broke her nose 2 days after Father
got the black eye. To the outside world it looked as though she had
said something to Father about the reason he had a black eye, and his
reply had been to slug her. I didn't think he would ever slug her, no
matter what.

There is a not quite remote possibility that he really did slug her,
of course. Lesser men would have slugged her under similar
circumstances. The real truth of the matter became unavailable to
historians forever when the falling ceiling of a gift shop on the
Canadian side of Niagara Falls killed both participants, as I've said,
some 20 years ago. They were said to have died instantly. They never
knew what hit them, which is the best way to go.

There was no argument about that in Vietnam or, I suppose, on any
battlefield. One kid I remember stepped on an antipersonnel mine. The
mine could have been one of our own. His best friend from Basic
Training asked him what he could do for him, and the kid replied:
"Turn me off like a light bulb, Sam."

The dying kid was white. The kid who wanted to help him was black, or
a light tan, actually. His features were practically white, you would
have to say.

A woman I was making love to a few years ago asked me if my parents
were still alive. She wanted to know more about me, now that we had
our clothes off.

I told her that they had suffered violent deaths in a foreign country,
which was true. Canada is a foreign country.

But then I heard myself spinning this fantastic tale of their being on
a safari in Tanganyika, a place about which I know almost nothing. I
told that woman, and she believed me, that my parents and their guide
were shot by poachers who were killing elephants for their ivory and
mistook them for game wardens. I said that the poachers put their
bodies on top of anthills, so that their skeletons were soon picked
clean. They could be positively identified only by their dental work.

I used to find it easy and even exhilarating to lie that elaborately.
I don't anymore. And I wonder now if I didn't develop that unwholesome
habit very young, and because my parents were such an embarrassment,
and especially my mother, who was fat enough to be a circus freak. I
described much more attractive parents than I really had, in order to
make people who knew nothing about them think well of me.

And during my final year in Vietnam, when I was in Public Information,
I found it as natural as breathing to tell the press and replacements
fresh off the boats or planes that we were clearly winning, and that
the folks back home should be proud and happy about all the good
things we were doing there.

I learned to lie like that in high school.


Another thing I learned in high school that was helpful in Vietnam:
Alcohol and marijuana, if used in moderation, plus loud, usually
low-class music, make stress and boredom infinitely more bearable. It
was manna from Heaven that I came into this world with a gift for
moderation in my intake of mood-modifying substances. During my last 2
years in high school, I don't think my parents even suspected that I
was half in the bag a lot of the time. All they ever complained about
was the music, when I played the radio or the phonograph or when The
Soul Merchants rehearsed in our basement, which Mom and Dad said was
jungle music, and much too loud.

In Vietnam, the music was always much too loud. Practically everybody
was half in the bag, including Chaplains. Several of the most gruesome
accidents I had to explain to the press during my last year over there
were caused by people who had rendered themselves imbecilic or
maniacal by ingesting too much of what, if taken in moderation, could
be a helpful chemical. I ascribed all such accidents, of course, to
human error. The press understood. Who on this Earth hasn't made a
mistake or 2?


The assassination of an Austrian archduke led to World War I, and
probably to World War II as well. Just as surely, my father's black
eye brought me to the sorry state in which I find myself today. He was
looking for some way, almost any way, to recapture the respect of the
community, and to attract favorable attention from Barrytron's new
owner, Du Pont. Du Pont, of course, has now been taken over by I. G.
Farben of Germany, the same company that manufactured and packaged and
labeled and addressed the cyanide gas used to kill civilians of all
ages, including babes in arms, during the Holocaust.

What a planet.

So Father, his injured eye looking like a slit in a purple and yellow
omelet, asked me if I was likely to receive any sort of honors at high
school graduation. He didn't say so, but he was frantic for something
to brag about at work. He was so desperate that he was trying to get
blood out of the turnip of my nonparticipation in high school sports,
student government, or school-sponsored extracurricular activities. My
grade average was high enough to get me into the University of
Michigan, and on the honor roll now and then, but not into the
National Honor Society.

It was so pitiful! It made me mad, too, because he was trying to make
me partly responsible for the family's image problem, which was all
his fault. "I was always sorry you didn't go out for football," he
said, as though a touchdown would have made everything all right
again.

"Too late now," I said.

"You let those 4 years slip by without doing anything but making
jungle music," he said.

It occurs to me now, a mere 43 years later, that I might have said to
him that at least I managed my sex life better than he had managed
his. I was getting laid all the time, thanks to jungle music, and so
were the other Soul Merchants. Certain sorts of not just girls but
full-grown women, too, found us glamorous free spirits up on the
bandstand, imitating black people and smoking marijuana, and loving
ourselves when we made music, and laughing about God knows what just
about anytime.


I guess my love life is over now. Even if I could get out of prison, I
wouldn't want to give some trusting woman tuberculosis. She would be
scared to death of getting AIDS, and I would give her TB instead.
Wouldn't that be nice?

So now I will have to make do with memories. As a prosthesis for my
memory, I have begun to list all the women, excluding my wife and
prostitutes, with whom I have "gone all the way," as we used to say in
high school. I find it impossible to remember any conquest I made as a
teenager with clarity, to separate fact from fantasy. It was all a
dream. So I begin my list with Shirley Kern, to whom I made love when
I was 20. Shirley is my datum.

How many names will there be on the list? Too early to tell, but
wouldn't that number, whatever it turns out to be, be as good a thing
as any to put on my tombstone as an enigmatic epitaph?


I am certainly sorry if I ruined the lives of any of those women who
believed me when I said I loved them. I can only hope against hope
that Shirley Kern and all the rest of them are still OK.

If it is any consolation to those who may not be OK, my own life was
ruined by a Science Fair.

Father asked me if there wasn't some school-sponsored extracurricular
activity I could still try out for. This was only 8 weeks before my
graduation! So I said, in a spirit of irony, since he knew science did
not delight me as it delighted him, that my last opportunity to amount
to anything was the County Science Fair. I got Bs in Physics and
Chemistry, but you could stuff both those subjects up your fundament
as far as I was concerned.

But Father rose from his chair in a state of sick excitement. "Let's
go down in the basement," he said. "There's work to do."

"What kind of work?" I said. This was about midnight.

And he said, "You are going to enter and win the Science Fair."


Which I did. Or, rather, Father entered and won the Science Fair,
requiring only that I sign an affidavit swearing that the exhibit was
all my own work, and that I memorize his explanation of what it
proved. It was about crystals and how they grew and why they grew.

His competition was weak. He was, after all, a 43-year-old chemical
engineer with 20 years in industry, taking on teenagers in a community
where few parents had higher educations. The main business in the
county back then was still agriculture, corn and pigs and beef cattle.
Barrytron was the sole sophisticated industry, and only a handful of
people such as Father understood its processes and apparatus. Most of
the company's employees were content to do what they were told and
incurious as to how it was, exactly, that they had worked the miracles
that somehow arrived all packaged and labeled and addressed on the
loading docks.

I am reminded now of dead American soldiers, teenagers mostly, all
packaged and labeled and addressed on loading docks in Vietnam. How
many people knew or cared how these curious artifacts were actually
manufactured?

A few.


Why Father and I were not branded as swindlers, why my exhibit was not
thrown out of the Science Fair, why I am a prisoner awaiting trial now
instead of a star reporter for the Korean owners of The New York Times
has to do with compassion, I now believe. The feeling was general in
the community, I think, that our little family had suffered enough.
Nobody in the county gave much of a darn about science anyway.

The other exhibits were so dumb and pitiful, too, that the best of
them would make the county look stupid if it and its honest creator
went on to the statewide competition in Cleveland. Our exhibit sure
looked slick and tidy. Another big plus from the judges' point of
view, maybe, when they thought about what the county's best was going
to be up against in Cleveland: our exhibit was extremely hard for an
ordinary person to understand or find at all interesting.


I remained philosophical, thanks to marijuana and alcohol, while the
community decided whether to crucify me as a fraud or to crown me as a
genius. Father may have had a buzz on, too. Sometimes it's hard to
tell. I served under 2 Generals in Vietnam who drank a quart of
whiskey a day, but it was hard to detect. They always looked serious
and dignified.

So off Father and I went to Cleveland. His spirits were high. I knew
we would go smash up there. I don't know why he didn't know we would
go smash up there. The only advice he gave me was to keep my shoulders
back when I was explaining my exhibit and not to smoke where the
judges might see me doing it. He was talking about ordinary
cigarettes. He didn't know I smoked the other kind.


I make no apologies for having been zapped during my darkest days in
high school. Winston Churchill was bombed out of his skull on brandy
and Cuban cigars during the darkest days of World War II.


Hitler, of course, thanks to the advanced technology of Germany, was
among the first human beings to turn their brains to cobwebs with
amphetamine. He actually chewed on carpets, they say. Yum yum.


Mother did not come to Cleveland with Father and me. She was ashamed
to leave the house, she was so big and fat. So I had to do most of the
marketing after school. I also had to do most of the housework, she
had so much trouble getting around. My familiarity with housework was
useful at West Point, and then again when my mother-in-law and then my
wife went nuts. It was actually sort of relaxing, because I could see
that I had accomplished something undeniably good, and I didn't have
to think about my troubles while I was doing it. How my mother's eyes
used to shine when she saw what I had cooked for her!

My mother's story is 1 of the few real success stories in this book.
She joined Weight Watchers when she was 60, which is my age now. When
the ceiling fell on her at Niagara Falls, she weighed only 52
kilograms!


This library is full of stories of supposed triumphs, which makes me
very suspicious of it. It's misleading for people to read about great
successes, since even for middle-class and upper-class white people,
in my experience, failure is the norm. It is unfair to youngsters
particularly to leave them wholly unprepared for monster screw-ups and
starring roles in Keystone Kop comedies and much, much worse.

The Ohio Science Fair took place in Cleveland's beautiful Moellenkamp
Auditorium. The theater seats had been removed and replaced with
tables for all the exhibits. There was a hint of my then distant
future in the auditorium's having been given to the city by the
Moellenkamps, the same coal and shipping family that gave Tarkington
College this library. This was long before they sold the boats and
mines to a British and Omani consortium based in Luxembourg.

But the present was bad enough. Even as Father and I were setting up
our exhibit, we were spotted by other contestants as a couple of
comedians, as Laurel and Hardy, maybe, with Father as the fat and
officious one and me as the dumb and skinny one. The thing was, Father
was doing all the setting up, and I was standing around looking bored.
All I wanted to do was go outside and hide behind a tree or something
and smoke a cigarette. We were violating the most basic rule of the
Fair, which was that the young exhibitors were supposed to do all the
work, from start to finish. Parents or teachers or whatever were
forbidden in writing to help at all.

It was as though I had entered the Soapbox Derby over in Akron, Ohio,
in a car for coasting down hills that I had supposedly built myself
but was actually my dad's Ferrari Gran Turismo.


We hadn't made any of the exhibit in the basement. When, at the very
beginning, Father said that we should go down in the basement and get
to work, we had actually gone down in the basement. But we stayed down
there for only about 10 minutes while he thought and thought, growing
ever mere excited. I didn't say anything.

Actually, I did say one thing. "Mmd if I smoke?" I said.

"Go right ahead," he said.

That was a breakthrough for me. It meant I could smoke in the house
whenever I pleased, and he wouldn't say anything.

Then he led the way back up to the living room. He sat down at
Mother's desk and made a list of things that should go into the
exhibit.

"What are you doing, Dad?" I said.

"Shh," he said. "I'm busy. Don't bother me."


So I didn't bother him. I had more than enough to think about as it
was. I was pretty sure I had gonorrhea. It was some sort of urethral
infection, which was making me very uncomfortable. But I hadn't seen a
doctor about it, because the doctor, by law, would have had to report
me to the Department of Health, and my parents would have been told
about it, as though they hadn't had enough heartaches already.

Whatever the infection was, it cleared itself up without my doing
anything about it. It couldn't have been gonorrhea, which never stops
eating you up of its own accord. Why should it ever stop of its own
accord? It's having such a nice time. Why call off the party? Look how
healthy and happy the kids are.


Twice in later life I would contract what was unambiguously gonorrhea,
once in Tegucigalpa, Honduras, and then again in Saigon, now Ho Chi
Minh City, in Vietnam. In both instances I told the doctors about the
self-healing infection 1 had had in high school.

It might have been yeast, they said. I should have opened a bakery.

So Father started coming home from work with pieces of the exhibit,
which had been made to his order at Barrytron: pedestals and display
cases, and explanatory signs and labels made by the print shop that
did a lot of work for Barrytron. The crystals themselves came from a
Pittsburgh chemical supply house that did a lot of business with
Barrytron. One crystal, I remember, caine all the way from Burma.

The chemical supply house must have gone to some trouble to get
together a remarkable collection of crystals for us, since what they
sent us couldn't have come from their regular stock. In order to
please a big customer like Barrytron, they may have gone to somebody
who collected and sold crystals for their beauty and rarity, not as
chemicals but as jewelry.

At any rate, the crystals, which were of museum quality, caused Father
to utter these famous last words after he spread them out on the
coffee table in our living room, gloatingly: "Son, there is no way we
can lose."


Well, as Jean-Paul Sartre says in Bartlett's Familiar Quotations,
"Hell is other people." Other people made short work of Father's and
my invincible contest entry in Cleveland 43 years ago.

Generals George Armstrong Custer at the Little Bighorn, and Robert E.
Lee at Gettysburg, and William Westmoreland in Vietnam all come to
mind.


Somebody said I time, I remember, that General Custer's famous last
words were, "Where are all these blankety-blank Injuns comin' from?"

Father and I, and not our pretty crystals, were for a little while the
most fascinating exhibit in Moellenkamp Auditorium. We were a
demonstration of abnormal psychology. Other contestants and their
mentors gathered around us and put us through our paces. They
certainly knew which buttons to push, so to speak, to make us change
color or twist and turn or grin horribly or whatever.

One contestant asked Father how old he was and what high school he was
attending.

That was when we should have packed up our things and gotten out of
there. The judges hadn't had a look at us yet, and neither had any
reporters. We hadn't yet put up the sign that said what my name was
and what school system I represented. We hadn't yet said anything
worth remembering.

If we had folded up and vanished quietly right then and there, leaving
nothing but an empty table, we might have entered the history of
American science as no-shows who got sick or something. There was
already an empty table, which would stay empty, only 5 meters away
from ours. Father and I had heard that it was going to stay empty and
why. The would-be exhibitor and his mother and father were all in the
hospital in Lima, Ohio, not Liina, Peru. That was their hometown. They
had scarcely backed out of their driveway the day before, headed for
Cleveland, they thought, with the exhibit in the trunk, when they were
rear-ended by a drunk driver.

The accident wouldn't have been half as serious as it turned out to be
if the exhibit hadn't included several bottles of different acids
which broke and touched off the gasoline. Both vehicles were
immediately engulfed in flames.

The exhibit was, I think, meant to show several important services
that acids, which most people were afraid of and didn't like to think
much about, were performing every day for Humanity.


The people who looked us over and asked us questions, and did not like
what they saw and heard, sent for a judge. They wanted us
disqualified. We were worse than dishonest. We were ridiculous!

I wanted to throw up. I said to Father, "Dad, honest to God, I think
we better get out of here. We made a mistake."

But he said we had nothing to be ashamed of, and that we certainly
weren't going to go home with our tails between our legs.

Vietnam!

So a judge did come over, and easily determined that I had no
understanding whatsoever of the exhibit. He then took Father aside and
negotiated a political settlement, man to man. He did not want to stir
up bad feelings in our hOme county, which had sent me to Cleveland as
its champion. Nor did he want to humiliate Father, who was an
upstanding member of his community who obviously had not read the
rules carefully. He would not humiliate us with a formal
disqualification, which might attract unfavorable publicity, if Father
in turn would not insist on having my entry put in serious competition
with the rest as though it were legitimate.

When the time came, he said, he and the other judges would simply pass
us by without comment. It would be their secret that we couldn't
possibly win anything.

That was the deal.

History.

5

The person who won that year was a girl from Cincinnati. As it
happened, she too had an exhibit about crystallography. She, however,
had either grown her own or gathered specimens herself from creek beds
and caves and coal mines within 100 kilometers of her home. Her name
was Mary Alice French, I remember, and she would go on to place very
close to the bottom in the National Finals in Washington, D.C.

When she set off for the Finals, I heard, Cincinnati was so proud of
her and so sure she would win, or at least place very high with her
crystals, that the Mayor declared "Mary Alice French Day."


I have to wonder now, with so much time in which to think about people
I've hurt, if Father and I didn't indirectly help set up Mary Alice
French for her terrible disappointment in Washington. There is a good
chance that the judges in Cleveland gave her First Prize because of
the moral contrast between her exhibit and ours.

Perhaps, during the judging, science was given a backseat, and because
of our ill fame, she represented a golden opportunity to teach a rule
superior to any law of science: that honesty was the best policy.

But who knows?


Many, many years after Mary Alice French had her heart broken in
Washington, and I had become a teacher at Tarkington, I had a male
student from Cincinnati, Mary Alice French's hometown. His mother's
side of the family had just sold Cincinnati's sole remaining daily
paper and its leading TV station, and a lot of radio stations and
weekly papers, too, to the Sultan of Brunei, reputedly the richest
individual on Earth.

This student looked about 12 when he came to us. He was actually 21,
but his voice had never changed, and he was only 150 centimeters tall.
As a result of the sale to the Sultan, he personally was said to be
worth $30,000,000, but he was scared to death of his own shadow.

He could read and write and do math all the way up through algebra and
trigonometry, which he had taught himself He was also probably the
best chess player in the history of the college. But he had no social
graces, and probably never would have any, because he found everything
about life so frightening.

I asked him if he had ever heard of a woman about my age in Cincinnati
whose name was Mary Alice French.

He replied: "I don't know anybody or anything. Please don't ever talk
to me again. Tell everybody to stop talking to me."

I never did find out what he did with all his money, if anything.
Somebody said he got married. Hard to believe!

Some fortune hunter must have got him.

Smart girl. She must be on Easy Street.


But to get back to the Science Fair in Cleveland: I headed for the
nearest exit after Father and the judge made their deal. I needed
fresh air. I needed a whole new planet or death. Anything would be
better than what I had.

The exit was blocked by a spectacularly dressed man. He was wholly
unlike anyone else in the auditorium. He was, incredibly, what I
myself would become: a Lieutenant Colonel in the Regular Army, with
many rows of ribbons on his chest. He was in full-dress uniform, with
a gold citation cord and paratrooper's wings and boots. We were not
then at war anywhere, so the sight of a military man all dolled up
like that among civilians, especially so early in the day, was
startling. He had been sent there to recruit budding young scientists
for his alma mater, the United States Military Academy at West Point.

The Academy had been founded soon after the Revolutionary War because
the country had so few military officers with mathematical and
engineering skills essential to victories in what was modem warfare
way back then, mainly mapmaking and cannonballs. Now, with radar and
rockets and airplanes and nuclear weapons and all the rest of it, the
same problem had come up again.

And there I was in Cleveland, with a great big round badge pinned over
my heart like a target, which said:


ExmBrroR.


This Lieutenant Colonel, whose name was Sam Wakefield, would not only
get me into West Point. In Vietnam, where he was a Major General, he
would award me a Silver Star for extraordinary valor and gallantry. He
would retire from the Army when the war still had a year to go, and
become President of Tarkington College, now Tarkington Prison. And
when I myself got out of the Army, he would hire me to teach Physics
and play the bells, bells, bells.

Here are the first words Sam Wakefield ever spoke to me, when I was 18
and he was 36:

"What's the hurry, Son?"


6

"What's the hurry, Son?" he said. And then, "If you've got a minute,
I'd like to talk to you."

So I stopped. That was the biggest mistake of my life. There were
plenty of other exits, and I should have headed for 1 of those. At
that moment, every other exit led to the University of Michigan and
journalism and music-making, and a lifetime of saying and wearing what
I goshdarned pleased. Any other exit, in all probability, would have
led me to a wife who wouldn't go insane on me, and kids who gave me
love and respect.

Any other exit would have led to a certain amount of misery, I know,
life being what it is. But I don't think it would have led me to
Vietnam, and then to teaching the unteachable at Tarkington College,
and then getting fired by Tarkington, and then teaching the
unteachable at the penitentiary across the lake until the biggest
prison break in American history. And now I myself am a prisoner..

But I stopped before the 1 exit blocked by Sam Wakefield.

There went the ball game.


Sam Wakefield asked me if I had ever considered the advantages of a
career in the military. This was a man who had been wounded in World
War II, the 1 war I would have liked to fight in, and then in Korea.
He would eventually resign from the Army with the Vietnam War still
going on, and then become President of Tarkington College, and then
blow his brains out.

I said I had already been accepted by the University of Michigan and
had no interest in soldiering. He wasn't having any luck at all. The
sort of kid who had reached a state-level Science Fair honestly wanted
to go to Cal Tech or MIT, or someplace a lot friendlier to freestyle
thinking than West Point. So he was desperate. He waS going around the
country recruiting the dregs of Science Fairs. He didn't ask me about
my exhibit. He didn't ask about my grades. He wanted my body, no
matter what it was.

And then Father came along, looking for me. The next thing I knew,
Father and Sam Wakefield were laughing and shaking hands.

Father was happier than I had seen him in years. He said to me, "The
folks back home will think that's better than any prize at a Science
Fair."

"What's better?" I said.

"You have just won an appointment to the United States Military
Academy," he said. "I've got a son I can be proud of now."

Seventeen years later, in 1975, I was a Lieutenant

? Colonel on the roof of the American Embassy in Saigon, keeping
everybody but Americans off helicopters that were ferrying badly
rattled people out to ships offshore. We had lost a war!


Losers!


I wasn't the worst young scientist Sam Wakefield persuaded to come to
West Point. One classmate of mine, from a little high school in
Wyoming, had shown early promise by making an electric chair for rats,
with little straps and a little black hood and all.

That was Jack Patton. He was no relation to "Old Blood and Guts"
Patton, the famous General in World War II. He became my
brother-in-law. I married his sister Margaret. She came with her folks
from Wyoming to see him graduate, and I fell in love with her. We sure
could dance.

Jack Patton was killed by a sniper in Hue¡Xpronounced "whay." He was a
Lieutenant Colonel in the Combat Engineers. I wasn't there, but they
say he got it right between the eyes. Talk about marksmanship! Whoever
shot him was a real winner.

The sniper didn't stay a winner very long, though, I heard. Hardly
anybody does. Some of our people figured out where he was. I heard he
couldn't have been more than 15 years old. He was a boy, not a man,
but if he was going to play men's games he was going to have to pay
men's penalties. After they killed him, I heard, they put his little
testicles and penis in his mouth as a warning to anybody else who
might choose to be a sniper.

Law and order. Justice swift and justice sure.

Let me hasten to say that no unit under my command was encouraged to
engage in the mutilation of bodies of enemies, nor would I have winked
at it if I had heard about it. One platoon in a battalion I led, on
its own initiative, took to leaving aces of spades on the bodies of
enemies, as sort of calling cards, I guess. This wasn't mutilation,
strictly speaking, but still I put a stop to it.

What a footsoldier can do to a body with his pip-squeak technology is
nothing, of course, when compared with the ordinary, unavoidable,
perfectly routine effects of aerial bombing and artillery. One time I
saw the severed head of a bearded old man resting on the guts of an
eviscerated water buffalo, covered with flies in a bomb crater by a
paddy in Cambodia. The plane whose bomb made the crater was so high
when it dropped it that it couldn't even be seen from the ground. But
what its bomb did, I would have to say, sure beat the ace of spades
for a calling card.


I don't think Jack Patton would have wanted the sniper who killed him
mutilated, but you never know. When he was alive he was like a dead
man in 1 respect:

everything was pretty much all right with him.

Everything, and I mean everything, was a joke to him, or so he said.
His favorite expression right up to the end was, "I had to laugh like
hell." If Lieutenant Colonel Patton is in Heaven, and I don't think
many truly professional soldiers have ever expected to wind up there,
at least not recently, he might at this very moment be telling about
how his life suddenly stopped in Hue, and then adding, without even
smiling, "I had to laugh like hell." That was the thing: Patton would
tell about some supposedly serious or beautiful or dangerous or holy
event during which he had had to laugh like hell, but he hadn't really
laughed. He kept a straight face, too, when he told about it
afterward. In all his life,

I don't think anybody ever heard him do what he said he had to do all
the time, which was laugh like hell.

He said he had to laugh like hell when he won a science prize in high
school for making an electric chair for rats, but he hadn't. A lot of
people wanted him to stage a public demonstration of the chair with a
tranquilized rat, wanted him to shave the head of a groggy rat and
strap it to the chair, and, according to Jack, ask it if it had any
last words to say, maybe wanted to express remorse for the life of
crime it had led.

The execution never took place. There was enough common sense in
Patton's high school, although not in the Science Department,
apparently, to have such an event denounced as cruelty to dumb
animals. Again, Jack Patton said without smiling, "I had to laugh like
hell."


He said he had to laugh like hell when I married his sister Margaret.
He said Margaret and I shouldn't take offense at that. He said he had
to laugh like hell when anybody got married.

I am absolutely sure that Jack did not know that there was inheritable
insanity on his mother's side of the family, and neither did his
sister, who would become my bride. When I married Margaret, their
mother seemed perfectly OK still, except for a mania for dancing,
which was a little scary sometimes, but harmless. Dancing until she
dropped wasn't nearly as loony as wanting to bomb North Vietnam back
to the Stone Age, or bombing anyplace back to the Stone Age.


My mother-in-law Mildred grew up in Peru, Indiana, but never talked
about Peru, even after she went crazy, except to say that Cole Porter,
a composer of ultraso phisticated popular songs during the first half
of the last century, was also born in Peru.


My mother-in-law ran away from Peru when she was 18, and never went
back again. She worked her way through the University of Wyoming, in
Laramie, of all places, which I guess was about as far away from Peru
as she could get without leaving the Milky Way. That was where she met
her husband, who was then a student in the university's School of
Veterinary Science.

Only after the Vietnam War, with Jack long dead, did Margaret and I
realize that she wanted nothing more to do with Peru because so many
people there knew she caine from a family famous for spawning
lunatics. And then she got married, keeping her family's terrifying
history to herself, and she reproduced.

My own wife married and reproduced in all innocence of the danger she
herself was in, and the risk she would pass on to our children.


Our own children, having grown up with a notoriously insane
grandmother in the house, fled this valley as soon as they could, just
as she had fled Peru. But they haven't reproduced, and with their
knowing what they do about their booby-trapped genes, I doubt that
they ever will.


Jack Patton never married. He never said he wanted kids. That could be
a clue that he did know about his crazy relatives in Peru, after all.
But I don't believe that. He was against everybody's reproducing,
since human beings were, in his own words, "about I ,000 times dumber
and meaner than they think they are."

I myself, obviously, have finally come around to his point of view.

During our plebe year, I remember, Jack all of a sudden decided that
he was going to be a cartoonist, although he had never thought of
being that before. He was compulsive. I could imagine him back in high
school in Wyoming, all of a sudden deciding to build an electric chair
for rats.

The first cartoon he ever drew, and the last one, was of 2
rhinoceroses getting married. A regular human preacher in a church was
saying to the congregation that anybody who knew any reason these 2
should not be joined together in holy matrimony should speak now or
forever hold his peace.

This was long before I had even met his sister Margaret.

We were roommates, and would be for all 4 years. So he showed me the
cartoon and said he bet he could sell it to Playboy.

I asked him what was funny about it. He couldn't draw for sour apples.
He had to tell me that the bride and groom were rhinoceroses. I
thought they were a couple of sofas maybe, or maybe a couple of
smashed-up sedans. That would have been fairly funny, come to think of
it: 2 smashed-up sedans taking wedding vows. They were going to settle
down.

"What's funny about it?" said Jack incredulously. "Where's your sense
of humor? If somebody doesn't stop the wedding, those two will mate
and have a baby rhinoceros."

"Of course," I said.

"For Pete's sake," he said, "what could be uglier and dumber than a
rhinoceros? Just because something can reproduce, that doesn't mean it
should reproduce."

I pointed out that to a rhinoceros another rhinoceros was wonderful.

"That's the point," he said. "Every kind of animal thinks its own kind
of animal is wonderful. So people getting married think they're
wonderful, and that they're going to have a baby that's wonderful,
when actually they're as ugly as rhinoceroses. Just because we think
we're so wonderful doesn't mean we really are. We could be really
terrible animals and just never admit it because it would hurt so
much."


During Jack's and my cow year at the Point, I remember, which would
have been our junior year at a regular college, we were ordered to
walk a tour for 3 hours on the Quadrangle, in a military manner, as
though on serious guard duty, in full uniform and carrying rifles.
This was punishment for our having failed to report another cadet who
had cheated on a final examination in Electrical Engineering. The
Honor Code required not only that we never lie or cheat but that we
snitch on anybody who had done those things.

We hadn't seen the cadet cheat. We hadn't even been in the same class
with him. But we were with him, along with one other cadet, when he
got drunk in Philadelphia after the Army¡XNavy game. He got so drunk
he confessed that he had cheated on the exam the previous June. Jack
and I told him to shut up, that we didn't want to hear about it, and
that we were going to forget about it, since it probably wasn't true
anyway.

But the other cadet, who would later be fragged in Vietnam, turned all
of us in. We were as corrupt as the cheater, supposedly, for trying to
cover up for him. "Fragging," incidentally, was a new word in the
English language that came out of the Vietnam War. It meant pitching a
fizzing fragmentation grenade into the sleeping quarters of an
unpopular officer. I don't mean to boast, but the whole time I was in
Vietnam nobody offered to frag me.

The cheater was thrown out, even though he was a firstie, which meant
he would graduate in only 6 more months. And Jack and I had to walk a
3-hour tour at night and in an ice-cold rain. We weren't supposed to
talk to each other or to anyone. But the nonsensical posts he and I
had to march intersected at I point. Jack muttered to me at one such
meeting, "What would you do if you heard somebody had just dropped an
atom bomb on New York City?"

It would be 10 minutes before we passed again. I thought of a few
answers that were obvious, such as that

I would be horrified, I would want to cry, and so on. But

I understood that he didn't want to hear my answer.

Jack wanted me to hear his answer.

So here he came with his answer. He looked me in the eye, and he said
without a flicker of a smile, "I'd laugh like hell."


The last time I heard him say that he had to laugh like hell was in
Saigon, where I ran into him in a bar. He told me that he had just
been awarded a Silver Star, which made him my equal, since I already
had one. He had been with a platoon from his company, which was
planting mines on paths leading to a village believed to be
sympathetic with the enemy, when a firefight broke out. So he called
for air support, and the planes dropped napalm, which is jellied
gasoline developed by Harvard University, on the village, killing
Vietnamese of both sexes and all ages. Afterward, he was ordered to
count the bodies, and to assume that they had all been ene mies, so
that the number of bodies could be in the news that day. That
engagement was what he got the Silver Star for. "I had to laugh like
hell," he said, but he didn't crack a smile.


He would have wanted to laugh like hell if he had seen me on the roof
of our embassy in Saigon with my pistol drawn. I had won my Silver
Star for finding and personally killing 5 enemy soldiers who were
hiding in a tunnel underground. Now I was on a rooftop, while
regiments of the enemy were right out in the open, with no need to
hide from anybody, taking possession without opposition of the streets
below. There they were down there, in case I wanted to kill lots more
of them. Pow! Pow! Pow!

I was up there to keep Vietnamese who had been on our side from
getting onto helicopters that were ferrying Americans only, civilian
employees at the embassy and their dependents, to our Navy ships
offshore. The enemy could have shot down the helicopters and come up
and captured or killed us, if they had wanted. But all they had ever
wanted from us was that we go home. They certainly captured or killed
the Vietnamese I kept off the helicopter after the very last of the
Americans, who was Lieutenant Colonel Eugene Debs Hartke, was out of
there.


The rest of that day:

The helicopter carrying the last American to leave Vietnam joined a
swarm of helicopters over the South China Sea, driven from their
roosts on land and running out of gasoline. How was that for Natural
History in the 20th Century: the sky filled with chattering, man- made
pterodactyls, suddenly homeless, unable to swim a stroke, about to
drown or starve to death.

Below us, deployed as far as the eye could see, was the most heavily
armed armada in history, in no danger whatsoever from anyone. We could
have all the deep blue sea we wanted, as far as the enemy was
concerned. Enjoy! Enjoy!

My own helicopter was told by radio to hover with 2 others over a
minesweeper, which had a landing platform for 1 pterodactyl, its own,
which took off so ours could land. Down we came, and we got out, and
sailors pushed our big, dumb, clumsy bird overboard. That process was
repeated twice, and then the ship's own improbable creature claimed
its roost again. I had a look inside it later on. It was loaded with
electronic gear that could detect mines and submarines under the
water, and incoming missiles and planes in the sky above.

And then the Sun itself followed the last American helicopter to leave
Saigon to the bottom of the deep blue sea.

At the age of 35, Eugene Delis Hartke was again as dissolute with
respect to alcohol and marijuana and loose women as he had been during
his last 2 years in high school. And he had lost all respect for
himself and the leadership of his country, just as, 17 years earlier,
he had lost all respect for himself and his father at the Cleveland,
Ohio, Science Fair.


His mentor Sam Wakefield, the man who recruited him for West Point,
had quit the Army a year earlier in order to speak out against the
war. He had become President of Tarkington College through powerful
family connections.

Three years after that, Sam Wakefield would commit suicide. So there
is another loser for you, even though he had been a Major General and
then a College President. I think exhaustion got him. I say that not
only because he seemed very tired all the time to me, but because his
suicide note wasn't even original and didn't seem to have that much to
do with him personally. It was word for word the same suicide note
left way back in 1932, when I was a negative 8 years old, by another
loser, George Eastman, inventor of the Kodak camera and founder of
Eastman Kodak, now defunct, only 75 kilometers north of here.

Both notes said this and nothing more: "My work is done."

In Sam Wakefield's case, that completed work, if he didn't want to
count the Vietnam War, consisted of 3 new buildings, which probably
would have been built anyway, no matter who was Tarkington's
President.


I am not writing this book for people below the age of 18, but I see
no harm in telling young people to prepare for failure rather than
success, since failure is the main thing that is going to happen to
them.

In terms of basketball alone, almost everybody has to lose. A high
percentage of the convicts in Athena, and now in this much smaller
institution, devoted their childhood and youth to nothing but
basketball and still got their brains knocked out in the early rounds
of some darn fool tournament.


Let me say further to the chance young reader that I would probably
have wrecked my body and been thrown out of the University of Michigan
and died on Skid Row somewhere if I had not been subjected to the
discipline of West Point. I am talking about my body now, and not my
mind, and there is no better way for a young person to learn respect
for his or now her bones and nerves and muscles than to accept an
appointment to any one of the 3 major service academies.

I entered the Point a young punk with bad posture and a sunken chest,
and no history of sports participation, save for a few fights after
dances where our band had played. When I graduated and received my
commission as a Second Lieutenant in the Regular Army, and tossed my
hat in the air, and bought a red Corvette with the back pay the
Academy had put aside for me, my spine was as straight as a ramrod, my
lungs were as capacious as the bellows of the forge of Vulcan, I was
captain of the judo and wrestling teams, and I had not smoked any sort
of cigarette or swallowed a drop of alcohol for 4 whole years! Nor was
I sexually promiscuous anymore. I never felt better in my life.

I can remember saying to my mother and father at graduation, "Can this
be me?"

They were so proud of me, and I was so proud of me. I turned to Jack
Patton, who was there with his booby-trapped sister and mother and his
normal father, and I asked him, "What do you think of us now,
Lieutenant Patton?" He was the goat of our class, meaning he had the
lowest grade average. So had General George Patton been, again no
relative of Jack's, who had been such a great leader in World War II.

What Jack replied, of course, unsmilingly, was that he had to laugh
like hell.

7


I have been reading issues of the Tarkington College alumni magazine,
The Musketeer, going all the way back to its first issue, which came
out in 1910. It was so named in honor of Musket Mountain, a high hill
not a mountain, on the western edge of the campus, at whose foot, next
to the stable, so many victims of the escaped convicts are buried now.

Every proposed physical improvement of the college plant triggered a
storm of protest. When Tarkington graduates came back here, they
wanted it to be exactly as they remembered it. And I thing at least
never did change, which was the size of the student body, stabilized
at 300 since 1925. Meanwhile, of course, the growth of the prison
population on the other side of the lake, invisible behind walls, was
as irresistible as Thunder Beaver, as Niagara Falls.

Judging from letters to The Musketeer, I think the change that
generated the most passionate resistance was the modernization of the
Lutz Carillon soon after World War H, a memorial to Ernest Hubble
Hiscock.

He was a Tarkington graduate who at the age of 21 was a nose-gunner on
a Navy bomber whose pilot crashed his plane with a full load of bombs
onto the flight deck of a Japanese aircraft carrier in the Battle of
Midway during World War II.

I would have given anything to die in a war that meaningful.


Me? I was in show business, trying to get a big audience for the
Government on TV by killing real people with live ammunition,
something the other advertisers were not free to do.

The other advertisers had to fake everything.

Oddly enough, the actors always turned out to be a lot more believable
on the little screen than we were. Real people in real trouble don't
come across, somehow.


There is still so much we have to learn about TV!


Hiscock's parents, who were divorced and remarried but still friends,
chipped in to have the bells mechanized, so that one person could play
them by means of a keyboard. Before that, many people had to haul away
on ropes, and once a bell was set swinging, it stopped swinging in its
own sweet time. There was no way of damping it.

In the old days 4 of the bells were famously off-key, but beloved, and
were known as "Pickle" and "Lemon" and "Big Cracked John" and
"Beelzebub." The Hiscocks had them sent to Belgium, to the same bell
foundry where Andr? Lutz had been an apprentice so long ago. There
they were machined and weighted to perfect pitch, their condition when
I got to play them.

It can't have been music the carillon made in the old days. Those who
used to make whatever it was described it in their letters to The
Musketeer with the same sort of batty love and berserk gratitude I
hear from convicts when they tell me what it was like to take heroin
laced with amphetamine, and angel dust laced with LSD, and crack
alone, and on and on. I think of all those learning-disabled kids in
the old days, hauling away on ropes with the bells clanging sweet and
sour and as loud as thunder directly overhead, and I am sure they were
finding the same undeserved happiness so many of the convicts found in
chemicals.

And haven't I myself said that the happiest parts of my life were when
I played the bells? With absolutely no basis in reality, 1 felt like
many an addict that I'd won, I'd won, I'd won!


When I was made carillonneur, I taped this sign on the door of the
chamber containing the keyboard:

"Thor." That's who I felt like when I played, sending thunderbolts
down the hillside and through the industrial ruins of Scipio, and out
over the lake, and up to the walls of the prison on the other side.

There were echoes when I played¡Xbouncing off the empty factories and
the prison walls, and arguing with notes just leaving the bells
overhead. When Lake Mohiga was frozen, their argument was so loud that
people who had never been in the area before thought the prison had
its own set of bells, and that their carillonneur was mocking me.

And I would yell into the mad clashing of bells and echoes, "Laugh,
Jack, laugh!"


After the prison break, the College President would shoot convicts
down below from the belfry. The acoustics of the valley would cause
the escapees to make many wrong guesses as to where the shots were
coming from.


8

In my day, the bells no longer swung. They were welded to rigid
shafts. Their clappers had been removed. They were struck instead by
bolts thrust by electricity from Niagara Falls. Their singing could be
stopped in an instant by brakes lined with neoprene.

The room in which a dozen or more learning-disabled bell-pullers used
to be zonked out of their skulls by hellishly loud cacophony contained
a 3-octave keyboard against 1 wall. The holes for the ropes in the
ceiling had been plugged and plastered over.

Nothing works up there anymore. The room with the keyboard and the
belfry above were riddled by bullets and also bazooka shells fired by
escaped convicts down below after a sniper up among the bells shot and
killed 11 of them, and wounded 15 more. The sniper was the President
of Tarkington College. Even though he was dead when the convicts got
to him, they were so outraged that they crucified him in the loft of
the stable where the students used to keep their horses, at the foot
of Musket Mountain.

So a President of Tarkington, my mentor Sam Wakefield, blew his brains
out with a Colt .45. And his successor, although he couldn't feel
anything, was crucified.

One would have to say that that was extra-heavy history.


As for light history: The no longer useful clappers of the bells were
hung in order of size, but unlabeled, on the wall of the foyer of this
library, above the perpetual-motion machines. So it became a college
tradition for upperclasspersons to tell incoming freshmen that the
clappers were the petrified penises of different mammals. The biggest
clapper, which had once belonged to Beelzebub, the biggest bell, was
said to be the penis of none other than Moby Dick, the Great White
Whale.

Many of the freshmen believed it, and were watched to see how long
they went on believing it, just as they had been watched when they
were little, no doubt, to see how long they would go on believing in
the Tooth Fairy, the Easter Bunny, and Santa Claus.


Vietnam.


Most of the letters to The Musketeer protesting the modernization of
the Lutz Carillon are from people who had somehow hung on to the
wealth and power they had been born to. One, though, is from a man who
admitted that he was in prison for fraud, and that he had ruined his
life and that of his family with his twin addictions to alcohol and
gambling. His letter was like this book, a gallows speech.

One thing he had still looked forward to, he said, after he had paid
his debt to society, was returning to Scipio to ring the bells with
ropes again.

"Now you take that away from me," he said.


One letter is from an old bell-puller, very likely dead by now, a
member of the Class of 1924 who had married a man named Marthinus de
Wet, the owner of a gold mine in Krugersdorp, South Africa. She knew
the history of the bells, that they had been made from weapons
gathered up after the Battle of Gettysburg. She did not mind that the
bells would soon be played electrically. The bad idea, as far as she
was concerned, was that the sour bells, Pickle and Lemon and Big
Cracked John and Beelzebub, were going to be turned on lathes in
Belgium until they were either in tune or on the scrap heap.

"Are Tarkington students no longer to be humanized and humbled as I
was day after day," she asked, "by the cries from the bell tower of
the dying on the sacred, blood-soaked grounds of Gettysburg?"

The bells controversy inspired a lot of purple prose like that, much
of it dictated to a secretary or a machine, no doubt. It is quite
possible that Mrs. de Wet graduated from Tarkington without being able
to write any better than most of the ill-educated prisoners across the
lake.


If my Socialist grandfather, nothing but a gardener at Butler
University, could read the letter from Mrs. de Wet and note its South
African return address, he would be grimly gratified. There was a
clear-as-crystal demonstration of a woman living high on profits from
the labor of black miners, overworked and underpaid.

He would have seen exploitation of the poor and powerless in the
growth of the prison across the lake as well. The prison to him would
have been a scheme for depriving the lower social orders of leadership
in the Class Struggle and for providing them with a horrible
alternative to accepting whatever their greedy paymasters would give
them in the way of working conditions and subsistence.

By the time I got to Tarkington College, though, he would have been
wrong about the meaning of the prison across the lake, since poor and
powerless people, no matter how docile, were no longer of use to canny
investors. What they used to do was now being done by heroic and
uncomplaining machinery.

So an appropriate sign to put over the gate to Athena might have been,
instead of "Work Makes Free," for example: "Too bad you were born.
Nobody has any use for you," or maybe: "Come in and stay in, all you
burdens on Society."


9

A former roommate of Ernest Hubble Hiscock, the dead war hero, who had
also been in the war, who had lost an arm as a Marine on Iwo Jima,
wrote that the memorial Hiscock himself would have wanted most was a
promise by the Board of Trustees at the start of each academic year to
keep the enrollment the same size it had been in his time.

So if Ernest Hubble Hiscock is looking down from Heaven now, or
wherever it is that war heroes go after dying, he would be dismayed to
see his beloved campus surrounded by barbed wire and watchtowers. The
bells are shot to hell. The number of students, if you can call
convicts that, is about 2,000 now.


When there were only 300 "students" here, each one had a bedroom and a
bathroom and plenty of closets all his or her own. Each bedroom was
part of a 2-bedroom, 2-bathroom suite with a common living room for 2.
Each living room had couches and easy chairs and a working fireplace,
and state-of-the-art sound-reproduction equipment and a big-screen TV.

At the Athena state prison, as I would discover when I went to work
over there, there were 6 men to each cell and each cell had been built
for 2. Each 50 cells had a recreation room with one Ping-Pong table
and one TV. The TV, moreover, showed only tapes of programs, including
news, at least 10 years old. The idea was to keep the prisoners from
becoming distressed about anything going on in the outside world that
hadn't been all taken care of one way or the other, presumably, in the
long-ago.

They could feast their eyes on whatever they liked, just so long as it
wasn't relevant.


How those letter-writers loved not just the college but the whole
Mohiga Valley¡Xthe seasons, the lake, the forest primeval on the other
side. And there were few differences between student pleasures in
their times and my own. In my time, students didn't skate on the lake
anymore, but on an indoor rink given in 1971 by the Israel Cohen
Family. But they still had sailboat races and canoe races on the lake.
They still had picnics by the ruins of the locks at the head of the
lake. Many students still brought their own horses to school with
them. In my time, several students brought not just 1 horse but 3,
since polo was a major sport. In 1976 and again in

1980, Tarkington College had an undefeated polo team. There are no
horses in the stable now, of course. The escaped convicts, surrounded
and starving a mere 4 days after the prison break, calling themselves
"Freedom Fighters" and flying an American flag from the top of the
bell tower of this library, ate the horses and the campus dogs, too,
and fed pieces of them to their hostages, who were the Trustees of the
college.


The most successful athlete ever to come from Tarkington, arguably,
was a horseman from my own time, Lowell Chung. He won a Bronze Medal
as a member of the United States Equestrian Team in Seoul, South
Korea, back in 1988. His mother owned half of Honolulu, but he
couldn't read or write or do math worth a darn. He could sure do
Physics, though. He could tell me how levers and lenses and
electricity and heat and all sorts of power plants worked, and predict
correctly what an experiment would prove before I'd performed it¡Xjust
as long as I didn't insist that he quantify anything, that he tell me
what the numbers were.

He earned his Associate in the Arts and Sciences Degree in 1984. That
was the only degree we awarded, fair warning to other institutions and
future employers, and to the students themselves, that our graduates'
intellectual achievements, while respectable, were unconventional.


Lowell Chung got me on a horse for the first time in my life when I
was 43 years old. He dared me. I told him I certainly wasn't going to
commit suicide on the back of one of his firecracker polo ponies,
since I had a wife and a mother-in-law and 2 children to support. So
he borrowed a gentle, patient old mare from his girlfriend at the
time, who was Claudia Roosevelt.

Comically enough, Lowell's then girlfriend was a whiz at arithmetic,
but otherwise a nitwit. You could ask her, "What is 5,111 times
10,022, divided by 97?"

Claudia would reply, "That's 528,066.4. So what? So


So what indeed! The lesson I myself learned over and over again when
teaching at the college and then the prison was the uselessness of
information to most people, except as entertainment. If facts weren't
funny or scary, or couldn't make you rich, the heck with them.


When I later went to work at the prison, I encountered a mass murderer
named Alton Darwin who also could do arithmetic in his head. He was
Black. Unlike Claudia Roosevelt, he was highly intelligent in the
verbal area. The people he had murdered were rivals or deadbeats or
police informers or cases of mistaken identity or innocent bystanders
in the illegal drug industry. His manner of speaking was elegant and
thought-provoking.

He hadn't killed nearly as many people as I had. But then again, he
hadn't had my advantage, which was the full cooperation of our
Government.

Also, he had done all his killing for reasons of money. I had never
stooped to that.

When I found out that he could do arithmetic in his head, I said to
him, "That's a remarkable gift you have."

"Doesn't seem fair, does it," he said, "that somebody should come into
the world with such a great advantage over the common folk? When I get
out of here, I'm going to buy me a pretty striped tent and put up a
sign saying 'One dollar. Come on in and see the Nigger do
arithmetic.'" He wasn't ever going to get out of there. He was serving
a life sentence without hope of parole.

Darwin's fantasy about starring in a mental-arithmetic show when he
got out, incidentally, was inspired by something 1 of his
great-grandfathers did in South Carolina after World War I. All the
airplane pilots back then were white, and some of them did stunt
flying at country fairs. They were called "barnstormers."

And 1 of these bamstormers with a 2-cockpit plane strapped Darwin's
great-grandfather in the front cockpit, even though the
great-grandfather couldn't even drive an automobile. The barnstormer
crouched down in the rear cockpit, so people couldn't see him but he
could still work the controls. And people came from far and wide,
according to Darwin, "to see the Nigger fly the airplane."

He was only 25 years old when we first met, the same age as Lowell
Chung when Lowell won the Bronze Medal for horseback riding in Seoul,
South Korea. When I was 25, I hadn't killed anybody yet, and hadn't
had nearly as many women as Darwin had. When he was only 20, he told
me, he paid cash for a Ferrari. I didn't have a car of my own, which
was a good car, all right, a Chevrolet Corvette, but nowhere near as
good as a Ferrari, until I was 21.

At least I, too, had paid cash.


When we talked at the prison, he had a running joke that was the
assumption that we came from different planets. The prison was all
there was to his planet, and I had come in a flying saucer from one
that was much bigger and wiser.

This enabled him to comment ironically on the only sexual activities
possible inside the walls. "You have little babies on your planet?" he
asked.

"Yes, we have little babies," I said.

"We got people here trying to have babies every which way," he said,
"but they never get babies. What do you think they're doing wrong?"


He was the first convict I heard use the expression "the PB." He told
me that sometimes he wished he had "the PB." I thought he meant "TB,"
short for "tuberculosis," another common affliction at the
prison¡Xcommon enough that I have it now.

It turned out that "PB" was short for "Parole Board," which is what
the convicts called AIDS.

That was when we first met, back in 1991, when he said that sometimes
he wished he had the PB, and long before I myself contracted TB.

Alphabet soup!


He was hungry for descriptions of this valley, to which he had been
sentenced for the rest of his life and where he could expect to be
buried, but which he had never seen. Not only the convicts but their
visitors, too, were kept as ignorant as possible of the precise
geographical situation of the prison, so that anybody escaping would
have no clear idea of what to watch out for or which way to go.

Visitors were brought into the cul-de-sac of the valley from Rochester
in buses with blacked-out windows. Convicts themselves were delivered
in windowless steel boxes capable of holding 10 of them wearing leg
irons and handcuffs, mounted on the beds of trucks. The buses and the
steel boxes were never opened until they were well inside the prison
walls.

These were exceedingly dangerous and resourceful criminals, after all.
While the Japanese had taken over the operation of Athena by the time
I got there, hoping to operate it at a profit, the blacked-out buses
and steel boxes had been in use long before they got there. Those
morbid forms of transportation became a common sight on the road to
and from Rochester in maybe 1977, about 2 years after I and my little
family took up residence in Scipio.

The only change the Japanese made in the vehicles, which was under way
when I went to work over there in 1991, was to remount the old steel
boxes on new Japanese trucks.


So it was in violation of long-standing prison policy that I told
Alton Darwin and other lifers all they wanted to know about the
valley. I thought they were entitled to know about the great forest,
which was their forest now, and the beautiful lake, which was their
lake now, and the beautiful little college, which was where the music
from the bells was coming from.

And of course, this enriched their dreams of escaping, but what were
those but what we could call in any other context the virtue hope? I
never thought they would ever really get out of here and make use of
the knowledge I had given them of the countryside, and neither did
they.


I used to do the same sort of thing in Vietnam, too, helping mortally
wounded soldiers dream that they would soon be well and home again.

Why not?


I am as sorry as anybody that Darwin and all the rest really tasted
freedom. They were horrible news for themselves and everyone. A lot of
them were real homicidal maniacs. Darwin wasn't 1 of those, but even
as the convicts were crossing the ice to Scipio, he was giving orders
as if he were an Emperor, as if the break were his idea, although he
had had nothing to do with it. He hadn't known it was coming.

Those who had actually breached the walls and opened the cells had
come down from Rochester to free only I convict. They got him, and
they were headed out of the valley and had no interest in conquering
Scipio and its little army of 6 regular policemen and 3 unarmed campus
cops, and an unknown number of firearms in private hands.


Alton Darwin was the first example I had ever seen of leadership in
the raw. He was a man without any badges of rank, and with no
previously existing organization or widely understood plan of action.
He had been a modest, unremarkable man in prison. The moment he got
out, though, sudden delusions of grandeur made him the only man who
knew what to do next, which was to attack Scipio, where glory and
riches awaited all who dared to follow him.

"Follow me!" he cried, and some did. He was a sociopath, I think, in
love with himself and no one else, craving action for its own sake,
and indifferent to any long-term consequences, a classic Man of
Destiny.


Most did not even follow him down the slope and out onto the ice. They
returned to the prison, where they had beds of their own, and shelter
from the weather, and food and water, although no heat or electricity.
They chose to be good boys, concluding correctly that bad boys roaming
free in the valley, but completely surrounded by the forces of law and
order, would be shot on sight in a day or 2, or maybe even sooner.
They were color-coded, after all.

In the Mohiga Valley, their skin alone sufficed as a prison uniform.


About half of those who followed Darwin out onto the ice turned back
before they reached Scipio. This was before they were fired upon and
suffered their first casualty. One of those who went back to the
prison told me that he was sickened when he realized how much murder
and rape there would be when they reached the other side in just a few
minutes.

"I thought about all the little children fast asleep in their beds,"
he said. He had handed over the gun he had stolen from the prison
armory to the man next to him, there in the middle of beautiful Lake
Mohiga. "He didn't have a gun," he said, "until I gave him 1."

"Did you wish each other good luck or anything like that?" I asked
him.

"We didn't say anything," he told me. "Nobody was saying anything but
the man in front."

"And what was he saying?" I asked.

He replied with terrible emptiness, "'Follow me, follow me, follow
me.'"


"Life's a bad dream," he said. "Do you know that?"


Alton Darwin's charismatic delusions of grandeur went on and on. He
declared himself to be President of a new country. He set up his
headquarters in the Board of Trustees Room of Samoza Hall, with the
big long table for his desk.

I visited him there at high noon on the second day after the great
escape. He told me that this new country of his was going to cut down
the virgin forest on the other side of the lake and sell the wood to
the Japanese. He would use the money to refurbish the abandoned
industrial buildings in Scipio down below. He didn't know yet what
they would manufacture, but he was thinking hard about that. He would
welcome any suggestions I might have.

Nobody would dare attack him, he said, for fear he would harm his
hostages. He held the entire Board of Trustees captive, but not the
College President, Henry "Tex" Johnson, nor his wife, Zuzu. I had come
to ask Darwin if he had any idea what had become of Tex and Zuzu. He
didn't know.

Zuzu, it would turn out, had been killed by a person or persons
unknown, possibly raped, possibly not. We will never know. It was not
an ideal time for Forensic Medicine. Tex, meanwhile, was ascending the
tower of the library here with a rifle and ammunition. He was going
clear to the top, to turn the belfry itself into a sniper's nest.


Alton Darwin was never worried, no matter how bad things got. He
laughed when he heard that paratroops, advancing on foot, had
surrounded the prison across the lake and, on our side, were digging
in to the west and south of Scipio. State Police and vigilantes had
already set up a roadblock at the head of the lake. Alton Darwin
laughed as though he had achieved a great victory.

I knew people like that in Vietnam. Jack Patton had that sort of
courage. I could be as brave as Jack over there. In fact, I am pretty
sure that I was shot at more and killed more people. But I was worried
sick most of the time. Jack never worried. He told me so.

I asked him how he could be that way. He said, "I think I must have a
screw loose. I can't care about what might happen next to me or
anyone."

Alton Darwin had the same untightened screw. He was a convicted mass
murderer, but never showed any remorse that I could see.


During my last year in Vietnam, I, too, reacted at press briefings as
though our defeats were victories. But I was under orders to do that.
That wasn't my natural disposition.


Alton Darwin, and this was true of Jack Patton, too, spoke of trivial
and serious matters in the same tone of voice, with the same gestures
and facial expressions. Nothing mattered more or less than anything
else.

Alton Darwin, I remember, was talking to me with seemingly deep
concern about how many of the convicts who had crossed the ice with
him to Scipio were deserting, were going back across the ice to the
prison, or turning themselves in at the roadblock at the head of the
lake in hopes of amnesty. The deserters were worriers. They didn't
want to die, and they didn't want to be held responsible, even though
many of them were responsible, for the murders and rapes in Scipio.

So I was pondering the desertion problem when Alton Darwin said with
exactly the same intensity, "I can skate on ice. Do you believe that?"

"I beg your pardon?" I said.

"I could always roller-skate," he said. "But I never got a chance to
ice-skate till this morning."

That morning, with the phones dead and the electricity cut off, with
unburied bodies everywhere, and with all the food in Scipio already
consumed as though by a locust plague, he had gone up to Cohen Rink
and put on ice skates for the first time in his life. After a few
tottering steps, he had found himself gliding around and around, and
around and around.

"Roller-skating and ice-skating are just about the very same thing!"
he told me triumphantly, as though he had made a scientific discovery
that was going to throw an entirely new light on what had seemed a
hopeless situation. "Same muscles!" he said importantly.


That's what he was doing when he was fatally shot about an hour later.
He was out on the rink, gliding around and around, and around and
around. I'd left him in his office, and I assumed that he was still up
there. But there he was on the rink instead, going around and around,
and around and around.

A shot rang out, and he fell down.

Several of his followers went to him, and he said something to them,
and then he died.


It was a beautiful shot, if Darwin was really the man the College
President was shooting at. He could have been shooting at me, since he
knew I used to make love to his wife Zuzu when he was out of the
house.

If he was shooting at Darwin instead of me, he solved one of the most
difficult problems in marksmanship, the same problem solved by Lee
Harvey Oswald when he shot President Kennedy, which is where to aim
when you are high above your target.

As I say, "Beautiful shot."


I asked later what Alton Darwin's last words had been, and was told
that they made no sense. His last words had been, "See the Nigger fly
the airplane."

10


Sometimes Alton Darwin would talk to me about the planet he was on
before he was transported in a steel box to Athena. "Drugs were food,"
he said. "I was in the food business. Just because people on one
planet eat a certain kind of food they're hungry for, that makes them
feel better after they eat it, that doesn't mean people on other
planets shouldn't eat something else. On some planets I'm sure there
are people who eat stones, and then feel wonderful for a little while
afterwards. Then it's time to eat stones again."


I thought very little about the prison during the 15 years I was a
teacher at Tarkington, as big and brutal as it was across the lake,
and growing all the time. When we went picnicking at the head of the
lake, or went up to Rochester on some errand or other, I saw plenty of
blacked-out buses and steel boxes on the backs of trucks. Alton Darwin
might have been in one of those boxes. Then again, since the steel
boxes were also used to carry freight, there might have been nothing
but Diet Pepsi and toilet paper in there.

Whatever was in there was none of my business until Tarkington fired
me.


Sometimes when I was playing the bells and getting particularly loud
echoes from the prison walls, usually in the dead of the wintertime, I
would have the feeling that I was shelling the prison. In Vietnam,
conversely, if I happened to be back with the artillery, and the guns
were lobbing shells at who knows what in some jungle, it seemed very
much like music, interesting noises for the sake of interesting
noises, and nothing more.


During a summer field exercise when Jack Patton and I were still
cadets, I remember, we were asleep in a tent and the artillery opened
up nearby.

We awoke. Jack said to me, "They're playing our tune, Gene. They're
playing our tune."


Before I went to work at Athena, I had seen only 3 convicts anywhere
in the valley. Most people in Scipio hadn't seen even 1. I wouldn't
have seen even 1, either, if a truck with a steel box in back hadn't
broken down at the head of the lake. I was picnicking there, near the
water, with Margaret, my wife, and Mildred, my mother-in-law. Mildred
was crazy as a bedbug by then, but Margaret was still sane, and there
seemed a good chance that she always would be.

I was only 45, foolishly confident that I would go on teaching here
until I reached the mandatory retirement age of 70 in 2010, 9 years
from now. What in fact will happen to me in 9 more years? That is like
worrying about a cheese spoiling if you don't put it in the
refrigerator. What can happen to a pricelessly stinky cheese that
hasn't already happened to it?


My mother-in-law, no danger to herself or anyone else, adored fishing.
I had put a worm on her hook for her and pitched it out to a spot that
looked promising. She gripped the rod with both hands, sure as always
that something miraculous was about to happen.

She was right this time.

I looked up at the top of the bank, and there was a prison truck with
smoke pouring out of its engine compartment. There were only 2 guards
on board, and 1 of them was the driver. They bailed out. They had
already radioed the prison for help. They were both white. This was
before the Japanese took over Athena as a business proposition, before
the road signs all the way from Rochester were in both English and
Japanese.

It looked as though the truck might catch fire, so the 2 guards
unlocked the little door in the back of the steel box and told the
prisoners to come out. And then they backed off and waited with
sawed-off automatic shotguns leveled at the little door.

Out the prisoners came. There were only 3 of them, clumsy in leg
irons, and their handcuffs were shackled to chains around their
waists. Two were black and 1 was white, or possibly a light Hispanic.
This was before the Supreme Court confirmed that it was indeed cruel
and inhuman punishment to confine a person in a place where his or her
race was greatly outnumbered by another 1.

The races were still mixed in prisons throughout the country. When I
later went to work at Athena, though, there was nothing but people who
had been classified as Black in there.

My mother-in-law did not turn around to see the smoking van and all.
She was obsessed by what might happen at any moment at the other end
of her flshlme. But Margaret and 1 gawked. For us back then, pnsoners
were like pornography, common things nice people shouldn't want to
see, even though the biggest industry by far in this valley was
punishment.

When Margaret and I talked about it later, she didn't say it was like
pornography. She said it was like seeing animals on their way to a
slaughterhouse.


We, in turn, must have looked to those convicts like people in
Paradise. It was a balmy day in the springtime. A sailboat race was
going on to the south of us. The college had just been given 30 little
sloops by a grateful parent who had cleaned out the biggest savings
and loan bank in California.

Our brand-new Mercedes sedan was parked on the beach nearby. It cost
more than my annual salary at Tarkington. The car was a gift from the
mother of a student of mine named Pierre LeGrand. His maternal
grandfather had been dictator of Haiti, and had taken the treasury of
that country with him when he was overthrown. That was why Pierre's
mother was so rich. He was very unpopular. He tried to win friends by
making expensive gifts to them, but that didn't work, so he tried to
hang himself from a girder of the water tower on top of Musket
Mountain. I happened to be up there, in the bushes with the wife of
the coach of the Tennis Team.

So I cut him down with my Swiss Army knife. That was how I got the
Mercedes.

Pierre would have better luck 2 years later, jumping off the Golden
Gate Bridge, and a campus joke was that now I had to give the Mercedes
back.

So there were plenty of heartaches in what, as I've said, must have
looked to those 3 convicts like Paradise. There was no way they could
tell that my mother-in-law was as crazy as a bedbug, as long as she
kept her back to them. They could not know, and neither could I, of
course, that hereditary insanity would hit my pretty wife like a ton
of bricks in about 6 months' time and turn her into a hag as scary as
her mother.


If we had had our 2 kids with us on the beach, that would have
completed the illusion that we lived in Paradise. They could have
depicted another generation that found life as comfortable as we did.
Both sexes would have been represented. We had a girl named Melanie
and a boy named Eugene Debs Hartke, Jr. But they weren't kids anymore.
Melanie was 21, and studying mathematics at Cambridge University in
England. Eugene Jr. was completing his senior year at Deerfield
Academy in Massachusetts, and was 18, and had his own rock-and-roll
band, and had composed maybe 100 songs by then.

But Melanie would have spoiled our tableau on the beach. Like my
mother until she went to Weight Watchers, she was very heavy. That
must be hereditary. If she had kept her back to the convicts, she
might at least have concealed the fact that she had a bulbous nose
like the late, great, alcoholic comedian W.C. Fields. Melanie, thank
goodness, was not also an alcoholic.

But her brother was.

And I could kill myself now for having boasted to him that on my side
of the family the men had no fear of alcohol, since they knew how to
drink in moderation.

We were not weak and foolish where drugs were concerned.


At least Eugene Jr. was beautiful, having inherited the features of
his mother. When he was growing up in this valley, people could not
resist saying to me, with him right there to hear it, that he was the
most beautiful child they'd ever seen.

I have no idea where he is now. He stopped communicating with me or
anybody in this valley years ago.

He hates me.


So does Melanie, although she wrote to me as recently as 2 years ago.
She was living in Paris with another woman. They were both teaching
English and math in an American high school over there.


My kids will never forgive me for not putting my mother-in-law into a
mental hospital instead of keeping her at home, where she was a great
embarrassment to them. They couldn't bring friends home. If I had put
Mildred into a nuthouse, though, I couldn't have afforded to send
Melanie and Eugene Jr. to such expensive schools. I got a free house
at Tarkington, but my salary was small.

Also, I didn't think Mildred's craziness was as unbearable as they
did. In the Army I had grown used to people who talked nonsense all
day long. Vietnam was I big hallucination. After adjusting to that, I
could adjust to anything.

What my children most dislike me for, though, is my reproducing in
conjunction with their mother. They live in constant dread of suddenly
going as batty as Mildred and Margaret. Unfortunately, there is a good
chance of that.


Ironically enough, I happen to have an illegitimate son about whom I
learned only recently. Since he had a different mother, he need not
expect to go insane someday. Some of his kids, if he ever has any,
could inherit my own mother's tendency to fatness, though.

But they could join Weight Watchers as Mother did.


Heredity is obviously much on my mind these days, and should be. So I
have been reading up on it some in a book that also deals with
embryology. And I tell you:

People who are wary of what they might find in a book if they opened I
are right to be. I have just had my mind blown by an essay on the
embryology of the human eye. No combination of Time and Luck could
have produced a camera that excellent, not even if the quantity of
time had been 1,000,000,000,000 years! How is that for an unsolved
mystery?


When I went to work at Athena, I hoped to find at least 1 of the 3
convicts who had seen Mildred and Margaret and me having a picnic so
long ago. As I've said, I took 1 of them to be a White, or possibly
Hispanic. So he would have been transferred to a White or Hispanic
prison before I ever got there. The other 2 were clearly black, but I
never found either of them. I would have liked to hear what we looked
like to them, how contented we seemed to be.

They were probably dead. AIDS could have got them, or murder or
suicide, or maybe tuberculosis. Every year, 30 inmates at Athena died
for every student who was awarded an Associate in the Arts and
Sciences Degree by Tarkington.


Parole.


If I had found a convict who had witnessed our picnic, we might have
talked about the fish my mother-in-law hooked while he was watching.
He saw her rod bend double, heard the reel scream like a little siren.
But he never got to see the monster who had taken her bait and was
headed south for Scipio. Before he could see it, he was back in
darkness in another van.


It was heavy test line I had put on the reel. This was deep-sea stuff
made for tuna and shark, although, as far as we knew, there was
nothing in Lake Mohiga but eels and perch and little catfish. That was
all Mildred had ever caught before.

One time, I remember, she caught a perch too little to keep. So I
turned it loose, even though the barb of the hook had come out through
one eye. A few minutes later she hooked that same perch again. We
could tell by the mangled eye. Think about that. Miraculous eyes, and
no brains whatsoever.


I put such heavy test line on Mildred's reel so that nothing could
ever get away from her. In Honduras 1 time I did the same thing for a
3-star General, whose aide I was.

Mildred's fish couldn't snap the line, and Mildred wouldn't let go of
the rod. She didn't weigh anything, and the fish weighed a lot for a
fish. Mildred went down on her knees in the water, laughing and
crying.

I'll never forget what she was saying: "It's God! It's God!"


I waded out to help her. She wouldn't let go of the rod, so I grasped
the line and began to haul it in, hand over hand.

How the water swirled and boiled out there!

When I got the fish into shallow water, it suddenly quit fighting. I
guess it had used up every bit of its energy. That was that.

This fish, which I picked up by the gills and flung up on the bank,
was an enormous pickerel. Margaret looked down at it in horror and
said, "It's a crocodile!"

I looked at the top of the bank to see what the convicts and guards
thought of a fish that big. They were gone. There was nothing but the
broken-down van up there. The little door to its steel box was wide
open. Anybody was free to climb inside and close the door, in case he
or she wondered what it felt like to be a prisoner.


To those fascinated by Forensic Medicine: The pickerel had not bitten
on the worm on the hook. It had bitten on a perch which had bitten on
the worm on the hook.

I thought that would be interesting to my mother-in-law during our
trip back home in the new Mercedes. But she didn't want to talk about
the fish at all. It had scared the daylights out of her, and she
wanted to forget it.

As the years went by, I would mention the fish from time to time
without getting anything back from her but a stony silence. I
concluded that she really had purged it from her memory.

But then, on the night of the prison break, when the 3 of us were
living in an old house in the hamlet of

Athena, down below the prison walls, there was this terrific explosion
that woke us up.

If Jack Patton had been there with us, he might have said to me,
"Gene! Gene! They're playing our tune again."

The explosion was in fact the demolition of Athena's main gate from
the outside, not the inside. The purported head of the Jamaican drug
cartel, Jeffrey Turner, had been brought down to Athena in a steel box
6 months before, after a televised trial lasting a year and a half. He
was given 25 consecutive life sentences, said to be a new record. Now
a well-rehearsed force of his employees, variously estimated as being
anything from a platoon to a company, had arrived outside the prison
with explosives, a tank, and several half-tracks taken from the
National Guard Armory about 10 kilometers south of Rochester, across
the highway from the Meadowdale Cinema Complex. One of their number,
it has since come out, moved to Rochester and joined the National
Guard, swearing to defend the Constitution and all that, with the sole
purpose of stealing the keys to the Armory.

The Japanese guards were wholly unprepared and unmotivated to resist
such a force, especially since the attackers were all dressed in
American Army uniforms and waving American flags. So they hid or put
their hands up or ran off into the virgin forest. This wasn't their
country, and guarding prisoners wasn't a sacred mission or anything
like that. It was just a business.

The telephone and power lines were cut, so they couldn't even call for
help or blow the siren.

The assault lasted half an hour. When it was over, Jeffrey Turner was
gone, and he hasn't been seen since. The attackers also disappeared.
Their uniforms and military vehicles were subsequently found at an
abandoned dairy farm owned by German land speculators a kilometer
north of the end of the lake. There were tire tracks of many
automobiles, which led police to conclude that it was by means of
unremarkable civilian vehicles, seemingly unrelated, and no doubt
leaving the farm at timed intervals, that the lawless force had made
its 100-percent-successful getaway.

Meanwhile, back at the prison, anyone who didn't want to stay inside
the walls anymore was free to walk out of there, first taking, if he
was so inclined and got there early, a rifle or a shotgun or a pistol
or a tear-gas grenade from the wide-open prison armory.


The police said, too, that the attackers of the prison obviously had
had first-class military training somewhere, possibly at a private
survival school somewhere in this country, or maybe in Bolivia or
Colombia or Peru.


Anyway: Margaret and Mildred and I were awakened by the explosion,
which demolished the main gate of the prison. There was no way we
could have imagined what was really going on.

The 3 of us were sleeping in separate bedrooms. Margaret was on the
first floor, Mildred and I were on the second floor. No sooner had I
sat up, my ears ringing, than Mildred came into my room stark naked,
her eyes open wide.

She spoke first. She used a slang word for hugeness I had never heard
her speak before. It wasn't slang of her generation or even mine. It
was slang of my children's generation. I guess she had heard it and
liked it, and then held it in reserve for some really important
occasion.

Here is what she said, as sporadic small-arms fire broke out at the
prison: "Do you remember that humongous fish I caught?"


11

At one time I fully expected to spend the rest of my life in this
valley, but not in jail. I envisioned my mandatory retirement from
Tarkington College in 2010. I would be modestly well-off with Social
Security and a pension from the College. My mother-in-law would surely
be dead by then, I thought, so I would have only Margaret to care for.
I would rent a little house in the town below. There were plenty of
empty ones.

But that dream would have been blasted even if there hadn't been a
prison break, even if the Social Security system hadn't gone bust and
the College Treasurer hadn't run off with the pension funds and so on.
For, as I've said before, in 1991 Tarkington College fired me.

There I was in late middle age, cut loose in a thoroughly looted,
bankrupt nation whose assets had been sold off to foreigners, a nation
swamped by unchecked plagues and superstition and illiteracy and
hypnotic TV, with virtually no health services for the poor. Where to
go? What to do?

The man who got me fired was Jason Wilder, the celebrated Conservative
newspaper columnist, lecturer, and television talk-show host. He saved
my life by doing that. If it weren't for him, I would have been on the
Scipio side of the lake instead of the Athena side during the prison
break.

I would have been facing all those convicts as they crossed the ice to
Scipio in the moonlight, instead of watching them in mute wonderment
from the rear, like Robert E. Lee during Pickett's Charge at the
Battle of Gettysburg. They wouldn't have known me, and I would still
have seen only 3 Athena convicts in all my time.

I would have tried to fight in some way, although, unlike the College
President, I would have had no guns. I would have been killed and
buried along with the College President and his wife Zuzu, and Alton
Darwin and all the rest of them. I would have been buried next to the
stable, in the shadow of Musket Mountain when the Sun went down.


The first time I saw Jason Wilder in person was at the Board meeting
when they fired me. He was then only an outraged parent. He would
later join the Board and become by far the most valuable of the
convicts' hostages after the prison break. Their threat to kill him
immobilized units of the 82nd Airborne Division, which had been
brought in by school bus from the South Bronx. The paratroops sealed
off the valley at the head of the lake and occupied the shoreline
across from Scipio and to the south of Scipio, and dug in on the
western slope of Musket Mountain. But they dared not come any closer,
for fear of causing the death of Jason Wilder.

There were other hostages, to be sure, including the rest of the
Trustees, but he was the only famous one. I myself was not strictly a
hostage, although I would probably have been killed if I had tried to
leave. I was a sort of floating, noncombatant wise man, wandering
wherever I pleased in Scipio under siege. As at Athena Prison, I tried
to give the most honest answer I could to any question anyone might
care to put to me. Otherwise I stayed silent. I volunteered no advice
at Athena, and none in Scipio under siege. I simply described the
truth of the inquirer's situation in the context of the world outside
as best I could. What he did next was up to him.

I call that being a teacher. I don't call that being a mastermind of a
treasonous enterprise. All I ever wanted to overthrow was ignorance
and self-serving fantasies.


I was fired without warning on Graduation Day. I was playing the bells
at high noon when a girl who had just completed her freshman year
brought the news that the Board of Trustees, then meeting in Samoza
Hall, the administration building, wanted to talk to me. She was
Kimberley Wilder, Jason Wilder's learning-disabled daughter. She was
stupid. I thought it was odd but not menacing that the Trustees would
have used her for a messenger. I couldn't imagine what business she
might have had that would bring her anywhere near their meeting. She
had in fact been testifying before them about my supposed lack of
patriotism, and had then asked for the honor of fetching me to my
liquidation.

She was one of the few underclasspersons still on the campus. The rest
had gone home, and relatives of those about to get their Associate in
the Arts and Sciences certificates had taken over their suites. No
relative of Kimberley's was about to graduate. She had stayed around
for the Trustees' meeting. And her famous father had come by
helicopter to back her up. The soccer field was being used as a
heliport. It looked like a rookery for pterodactyls.

Others had arrived in conventional aircraft at Rochester, where they
had been met by rented limousines provided by the college. One
senior's stepmother said, I remember, that she thought she had landed
in Yokohama instead of Rochester because there were so many Japanese.
The thing was that the changing of the guard at Athena had coincided
with Graduation Day. New guards, mostly country boys from Hokkaido,
who spoke no English and had never seen the United States, were flown
directly to Rochester from Tokyo every 6 months, and taken to Athena
by bus. And then those who had served 6 months at the gates, and on
the walls and catwalks over the mess halls, and in the watchtowem, and
so on, were flown straight home.


"How come you haven't gone home, Kimberley?" I said.

She said that she and her father wanted to hear the graduation
address, which was to be delivered by her father's close friend and
fellow Rhodes Scholar, Dr. Martin Peale Blankenship, the University of
Chicago economist who would later become a quadriplegic as a result of
a skiing accident in Switzerland.

Dr. Blankenship had a niece in the graduating class. That was what
brought him to Scipio. His niece was Hortense Mellon. I have no idea
what became of Hortense. She could play the harp. I remember that, and
her upper teeth were false. The real teeth were knocked out by a
mugger as she left a friend's coming-out party at the Waldorf-Astoria,
which has since burned down. There is nothing but a vacant lot there
now, which was bought by the Japanese.

I heard that her father, like so many other Tarkington parents, lost
an awful lot of money in the biggest swindle in the history of Wall
Street, stock in a company called Microsecond Arbitrage.


I had spotted Kimberley as a snoop, all right, but not as a walking
recording studio. All through the academic year now ending, our paths
had crossed with puzzling frequency. Again and again I would be
talking to somebody, almost anywhere on the campus, and realize that
Kimberley was lurking close by. I assumed that she was slightly
cracked, and was eavesdropping on everyone, avid for gossip. She
wasn't even taking a course of mine for credit, although she did audit
both Physics for Non-scientists and Music Appreciation for
Nonmusicians. So what could I possibly be to her or she to me? We had
never had a conversation about anything.

One time, I remember, I was shooting pool in the new recreation
center, the Pahlavi Pavilion, and she was so close that I was having
trouble working my cuestick, and I said to her, "Do you like my
perfume?"

"What?" she said.

"I find you so close to me so often," I said, "I thought maybe you
liked my perfume. I'm very flattered, if that's the case, because
that's nothing but my natural body odor. I don't use perfume."

I can quote myself exactly, since those words were on one of the tapes
the Trustees would play back for me.

She shrugged as though she didn't know what I was talking about. She
didn't leave the Pavilion in great embarrassment. On the contrary! She
gave me a little more room for my cuestick but was still practically
on top of me.

I was playing 8-ball head to head with the novelist Paul Slazinger,
that year's Writer in Residence. He was dead broke and out of print,
which is the only reason anybody ever became Writer in Residence at
Tarkington. He was so old that he had actually been in World War II.
He had won a Silver Star like me when I was only 3 years old!

He asked me who Kimberley was, and I said, and she got this on tape,
too, "Pay no attention. She's just another member of the Ruling
Class."

So the Board of Trustees would want to know what it was, exactly, that
I had against the Ruling Class.

I didn't say so back then, but I am perfectly happy to say now that
the trouble with the Ruling Class was that too many of its members
were nitwits like Kimberley.


One theory I had about her snooping was that she was titillated by my
reputation as the campus John F. Kennedy as far as sex outside of
marriage was concerned.

If President Kennedy up in Heaven ever made a list of all the women he
had made love to, lam sure it would be 2 or 3 times as long as the one
I am making down here in jail. Then again, he had the glamour of his
office, and the full cooperation of the Secret Service and the White
House Staff. None of the names on my list would mean anything to the
general public, whereas many on his would belong to movie stars. He
made love to Marilyn Monroe. I sure never did. She evidently expected
to marry him and become First Lady, which was a joke to everybody but
her.

She eventually committed suicide. She finally found life too
embarrassing.


I still hardly knew Kimberley when she appeared in the bell tower on
Graduation Day. But she was chatty, as though we were old, old pals.
She was still recording me, although what she already had on tape was
enough to do me in.

She asked me if I thought the speech Paul Slazinger, the Writer in
Residence, gave in Chapel had been a good one. This was probably the
most anti-American speech I had ever heard. He gave it right before
Christmas vacation, and was never again seen in Scipio. He had just
won a so-called Genius Grant from the MacArthur Foundation, $50,000 a
year for 5 years. On the same night of his speech he bugged out for
Key West, Florida.

He predicted, I remember, that human slavery would come back, that it
had in fact never gone away. He said that so many people wanted to
come here because it was so easy to rob the poor people, who got
absolutely no protection from the Government. He talked about bridges
falling down and water mains breaking because of no maintenance. He
talked about oil spills and radioactive waste and poisoned aquifers
and looted banks and liquidated corporations. "And nobody ever gets
punished for anything," he said. "Being an American means never having
to say you're sorry."

On and on he went. No matter what he said, he was still going to get
$50,000 a year for 5 years.

I said to Kimberley that I thought Slazinger had said some things
which were worth considering, but that, on the whole, he had made the
country sound a lot worse than it really was, and that ours was still
far and away the best one on the planet.

She could not have gotten much satisfaction from that reply.


What do I myself make of that reply nowadays? It was an inane reply.


She asked me about my own lecture in Chapel only a month earlier. She
hadn't attended and so hadn't taped it. She was seeking confirmation
of things other people had said I said. My lecture had been humorous
recollections of my maternal grandfather, Benjamin Wills, the old-time
Socialist.

She accused me of saying that all rich people were drunks and
lunatics. This was a garbling of Grandfather's saying that Capitalism
was what the people with all our money, drunk or sober, sane or
insane, decided to do today. So I straightened that out, and explained
that the opinion was my grandfather's, not my own.

"I heard your speech was worse than Mr. Slazinger's," she said.

"I certainly hope not," I said. "I was trying to show how outdated my
grandfather's opinions were. I wanted people to laugh. They did."

"I heard you said Jesus Christ was un-American," she said, her tape
recorder running all the time.

So I unscrambled that one for her. The original had been another of
Grandfather's sayings. He repeated Karl Marx's prescription for an
ideal society, "From each according to his abilities, to each
according to his needs." And then he asked me, meaning it to be a wry
joke, "What could be more un-American, Gene, than sounding like the
Sermon on the Mount?"


"What about putting all the Jews in a concentration camp in Idaho?"
said Kimberley.

"What about what-what-what?" I asked in bewilderment. At last, at
last, and too late, too late, I understood that this stupid girl was
as dangerous as a cobra. It would be catastrophic if she spread the
word that I was an anti-Semite, especially with so many Jews, having
interbred with Gentiles, now sending their children to Tarkington.

"In all my life, I never said anything like that," I promised.

"Maybe it wasn't Idaho," she said.

"Wyoming?" I said.

"OK, Wyoming," she said. "Lock 'em all up, right?"

"I only said 'Wyoming' because I was married in Wyoming," I said.
"I've never been to Idaho or even thought about Idaho. I'm just trying
to figure out what you've got so all mixed up and upside down. It
doesn't sound even a little bit like me."

"Jews," she said.

"That was my grandfather again," I said.

"He hated Jews, right?" she said.

"No, no, no," I said. "He admired a lot of them."

"But he still wanted to put them in concentration camps," she said.
"Right?"

The origin of this most poisonous misunderstanding was in my account
in Chapel of riding around with Grandfather in his car one Sunday
morning in Midland City, Ohio, when I was a little boy. He, not I, was
mocking all organized religions.

When we passed a Catholic church, I recalled, he said, "You think your
dad's a good chemist? They're turning soda crackers into meat in
there. Can your dad do that?"

When we passed a Pentecostal church, he said, "The mental giants in
there believe that every word is true in a book put together by a
bunch of preachers 300 years after the birth of Christ. I hope you
won't be that dumb about words set in type when you grow up."

I would later hear, incidentally, that the woman my father got
involved with when I was in high school, when he jumped out a window
with his pants down and got bitten by a dog and tangled in a
clothesline and so on, was a member of that Pentecostal church.


What he said about Jews that morning was actually another kidding of
Christianity. He had to explain to me, as I would have to explain to
Kimberley, that the Bible consisted of 2 separate works, the New
Testament and the Old Testament. Religious Jews gave credence only to
what was supposedly their own history, the Old Testament, whereas
Christians took both works seriously.

"I pity the Jews," said Grandfather, "trying to get through life with
only half a Bible."

And then he added, "That's like trying to get from here to San
Francisco with a road map that stops at Dubuque, Iowa."


I was angry now. "Kimberley," I asked, "did you by any chance tell the
Board of Trustees that I said these things? Is that what they want to
see me about?"

"Maybe," she said. She was acting cute. I thought this was a dumb
answer. It was in fact accurate. The

Trustees had a lot more they wanted to discuss than misrepresentations
of my Chapel lecture.

I found her both repulsive and pitiful. She thought she was such a
heroine and I was such a viper! Now that I had caught on to what she
had been up to, she was thrilled to show me that she was proud and
unafraid. Little did she know that I had once thrown a man almost as
big as she out of a helicopter. What was to prevent me from throwing
her out a tower window? The thought of doing that to her crossed my
mind. I was so insulted! That would teach her not to insult me!

The man I threw out of the helicopter had spit in my face and bitten
my hand. I had taught him not to insult me.


She was pitiful because she was a dimwit from a brilliant family and
believed that she at last had done something brilliant, too, in
getting the goods on a person whose ideas were criminal. I didn't know
yet that her Rhodes Scholar father, a Phi Beta Kappa from Princeton,
had put her up to this. I thought she had noted her father's
conviction, often expressed in his columns and on his TV show, and no
doubt at home, that a few teachers who secretly hated their country
were making young people lose faith in its future and leadership.

I thought that, just on her own, she had resolved to find such a
villain and get him fired, proving that she wasn't so dumb, after all,
and that she was really Daddy's little girl.

Wrong.

"Kimberley," I said, as an alternative to throwing her out the window,
"this is ridiculous."

Wrong.


"All right," I said, "we're going to settle this in a hurry."

Wrong.

I would stride into the Trustees' meeting, I thought, shoulders
squared, and radiant with righteous indignation, the most popular
teacher on campus, and the only faculty member who had medals from the
Vietnam War. When it comes right down to it, that is why they fired
me, although I don't believe they themselves realized that that was
why they fired me: I had ugly, personal knowledge of the disgrace that
was the Vietnam War.

None of the Trustees had been in that war, and neither had
Kiinberley's father, and not one of them had allowed a son or a
daughter to be sent over there. Across the lake in the prison, of
course, and down in the town, there were plenty of somebody's Sons who
had been sent over there.

   

12

I met just 2 people when I crossed the Quadrangle to Samoza Hall. One
was Professor Marilyn Shaw, head of the Department of Life Sciences.
She was the only other faculty member who had served in Vietnam. She
had been a nurse. The other was Norman Everett, an old campus gardener
like my grandfather. He had a son who had been paralyzed from the
waist down by a mine in Vietnam and was a permanent resident in a
Veterans Administration hospital over in Schenectady.

The seniors and their families and the rest of the faculty were having
lunch in the Pavilion. Everybody got a lobster which had been boiled
alive.


I never considered making a pass at Marilyn, although she was
reasonably attractive and unattached. I don't know why that is. There
may have been some sort of incest taboo operating, as though we were
brother and sister, since we had both been in Vietnam.

She is dead now, buried next to the stable, in the shadow of Musket
Mountain when the Sun goes down.

She was evidently hit by a stray bullet. Who in his right mind would
have taken dead aim at her?

Remembering her now, I wonder if I wasn't in love with her, even
though we avoided talking to each other as much as possible.


Maybe I should put her on a very short list indeed: all the women I
loved. That would be Marilyn, I think, and Margar?t during the first 4
years or so of our marriage, before I came home with the clap. I was
also very fond of Harriet Gummer, the war correspondent for The Des
Moines Register, who, it turns out, bore me a son after our love
affair in Manila. I think I felt what could be called love for Zuzu
Johnson, whose husband was crucified. And I had a deep, thoroughly
reciprocated, multidimensioned friendship with Muriel Peck, who was a
bartender at the Black Cat Cafe the day I was fired, who later became
a member of the English Department.

End of list.

Muriel, too, is buried next to the stable, in the shadow of Musket
Mountain when the Sun goes down.

Harriet Gummer is also dead, but out in Iowa.

Hey, girls, wait for me, wait for me.


I don't expect to break a world's record with the number of women I
made love to, whether I loved them or not. As far as I am concerned,
the record set by Georges Simenon, the French mystery writer, can
stand for all time. According to his obituary in The New York Times,
he copulated with 3 different women a day for years and years.


Marilyn Shaw and I hadn't known each other in Vietnam, but we had a
friend in common there, Sam Wakefield. Afterward, he had hired both of
us for Tarkington, and then committed suicide for reasons unclear even
to himself, judging from the plagiarized note he left on his bedside
table.

He and his wife, who would become Tarkington's Dean of Women, were
sleeping in separate rooms by then.


Sam Wakefield, in my opinion, saved Marilyn's and my lives before he
gave up on his own. If he hadn't hired both of us for Tarkington,
where we both became very good teachers of the learning-disabled, I
don't know what would have become of either of us. When we passed yet
again like ships in the night on the Quadrangle, with me on my way to
get fired, I was, incredibly, a tenured Full Professor of Physics and
she was a tenured Full Professor of Life Sciences!

When I was still a teacher here, I asked GRIOTTU, the most popular
computer game at the Pahlavi Pavilion, what might have become of me
after the war instead of what really happened. The way you play
GRIOTTh, of course, is to tell the computer the age and race and
degree of education and present situation and drug use, if any, and so
on of a person. The person doesn't have to be real. The computer
doesn't ask if the person is real or not. It doesn't care about
anything. It especially doesn't care about hurting people's feelings.
You load it up with details about a life, real or imagined, and then
it spits out a story about what was likely to happen to him or her.
This story is based on what has happened to real persons with the same
general specifications.

		 GRIOT~ won't work without certain pieces of
information. If you leave out race, for instance, it flashes the words
"ethnic origin" on its screen, and stops cold. If it doesn't know
that, it can't go on. The same with education.

I didn't tell GRIOTTM that I had landed a job I loved here. I told it
only about my life up to the end of the Vietnam War. It knew all about
the Vietnam War and the sorts of veterans it had produced. It made me
a burned-out case, on the basis of my length of service over there, I
think. It had me becoming a wife-beater and an alcoholic, and winding
up all alone on Skid Row.


If I had access to GRJOTTM now, I might ask it what might have
happened to Marilyn Shaw if Sam Wakefield hadn't rescued her. But the
escaped convicts smashed up the one in the Pavilion soon after I
showed them how to work it.

They hated it, and I didn't blame them. I was immediately sorry that I
had let them know of its existence. One by one they punched in their
race and age and what their parents did, if they knew; and how long
they'd gone to school and what drugs they'd taken and so on, and
GRIOTTM sent them straight to jail to serve long sentences.


I have no idea how much GRIOTIM back then may have known about Vietnam
nurses. The manufacturers claimed then as now that no program in
stores was more than 3 months old, and so every program was right
up-to-date about what had really happened to this or that sort of
person at the time you bought it. The programmers, supposedly, were
constantly updating GRJOT~ with the news of the day about plumbers,
about podiatrists, about Vietnam boat people and Mexican wetbacks,
about drug smugglers, about paraplegics, about everyone you could
think of within the continental limits of the United States and
Canada.

There is some question now, I've heard, about whether GMOT~ is as deep
and up-to-date as it used to be, since Parker Brothers, the company
that makes it, has been taken over by Koreans. The new owners are
moving the whole operation to Indonesia, where labor costs next to
nothing. They say they will keep up with American news by satellite.

One wonders.


I don't need any help from GRIOPTM to know that Marilyn Shaw had a
much rougher war than I did. All the soldiers she had to deal with
were wounded, and all of them expected of her what was more often than
not impossible: that she make them whole again.

I know that she was married, and that her husband back home divorced
her and married somebody else while she was still over there, and that
she didn't care. She and Sam Wakefield may have been lovers over
there. I never asked.

That seems likely. After the war he went looking for her and found her
taking a course in Computer Science at New York University. She didn't
want to be a nurse anymore. He told her that maybe she should try
being a teacher instead. She asked him if there was a chapter of
Alcoholics Anonymous in Scipio, and he said there was.

After he shot himself, Marilyn, Professor Shaw, fell off the wagon for
about a week. She disappeared, and I was given the job of finding her.
I discovered her downtown, drunk and asleep on a pool table in the
back room of the Black Cat Cafe. She was drooling on the felt. One
hand was on the cue ball, as though she meant to throw it at something
when she regained consciousness.


As far as I know, she never took another drink.


		 GIUOT~, in the old days anyway, before the Koreans
promised to make Parker Brothers lean and mean in Indonesia, didn't
come up with the same biography every time you gave it a certain set
of facts. Like life itself, it offered a variety of possibilities,
spitting out endings according to what the odds for winning or losing
or whatever were known to be.

After GRJOT~ put me on Skid Row 15 years ago, I had it try again. I
did a little better, but not as well as I was doing here. It had me
stay in the Army and become an instructor at West Point, but unhappy
and bored. I lost my wife again, and still drank too much, and had a
succession of woman friends who soon got sick of me and my
depressions. And I died of cirrhosis of the liver a second time.


GRIOT~ didn't have many alternatives to jail for the escaped convicts,
though. If it came up with a parole, it soon put the ex-con back in a
cage again.


The same thing happened if GRIOTTM was told that the jailbird was
Hispanic. It was somewhat more optimistic about Whites, if they could
read and write, and had never been in a mental hospital or been given
a Dishonorable Discharge from the Armed Forces. Otherwise, they might
as well be Black or Hispanic.


The wild cards among jailbirds, as far as GR1OT~ was concerned, were
Orientals and American Indians.

When the Supreme Court handed down its decision that prisoners should
be segregated according to race, many jurisdictions did not have
enough Oriental or American Indian criminals to make separate
institutions for them economically feasible. Hawaii, for example, had
only 2 American Indian prisoners, and Wyoming, my wife's home state,
had only I Oriental.

Under such circumstances, said the Court, Indians and/or Orientals
should be made honorary Whites, and treated accordingly.

This state has plenty of both, however, particularly after Indians
began to make tax-free fortunes smuggling drugs over unmapped trails
across the border from Canada. So the Indians had a prison all their
own at what their ancestors used to call "Thunder Beaver," what we
call "Niagara Falls." The Orientals have their own prison at Deer
Park, Long Island, conveniently located only 50 kilometers from their
heroin-processing plants in New York City's Chinatown.


When you dare to think about how huge the illegal drug business is in
this country, you have to suspect that practically everybody has a
steady buzz on, just as I did during my last 2 years in high school,
and just as General Grant did during the Civil War, and just as
Winston Churchill did during World War II.


So Marilyn Shaw and I passed yet again like ships in the night on the
Quadrangle. It would be our last encounter there. Without either of us
knowing that it would be the last time, she said something that in
retrospect is quite moving to me. What she said was derived from our
exploratory conversation at the cocktail party that had welcomed us to
the faculty so long ago.

I had told her about how I met Sam Wakefield at the Cleveland Science
Fair, and what the first words were that he ever spoke to me. Now, as
I hastened to my doom, she played back those words to me: "What's the
hurry, Son?"

   

13

The Chairman of the Board of Trustees that fired me 10 years ago was
Robert W. Moellenkamp of West Palm Beach, himself a graduate of
Tarkington and the father of 2 Tarkingtonians, 1 of whom had been my
student. As it happened, he was on the verge of losing his fortune,
which was nothing but paper, in Microsecond Arbitrage, Incorporated.
That swindle claimed to be snapping up bargains in food and shelter
and clothing and fuel and medicine and raw materials and machinery and
so on before people who really needed them could learn of their
existence. And then the company's computers, supposedly, would get the
people who really needed whatever it was to bid against each other,
running profits right through the roof. It was able to do this with
its clients' money, supposedly, because its computers were linked by
satellites to marketplaces in every corner of the world.

The computers, it would turn out, weren't connected to anything but
each other and their credulous clients like Tarkinglon's Board
Chairman. He was high as a kite on printouts describing brilliant
trades he had made in places like Tierra del Fuego and Uganda and God
knows where else, when he agreed with the Panjandrum of American
Conservatism, Jason Wilder, that it was time to fire me. Microsecond
Arbitrage was his angel dust, his LSD, his heroin, his jug of
Thunderbird wine, his cocaine.


I myself have been addicted to older women and housekeeping, which my
court-appointed lawyer tells me might be germs we could make grow into
a credible plea of insanity. The most amazing thing to him was that I
had never masturbated.

"Why not?" he said.

"My mother's father made me promise never to do it, because it would
make me lazy and crazy," I said.

"And you believed him?" he said. He is only 23 years old, fresh out of
Syracuse.

And I said, "Counselor, in these fast-moving times, with progress gone
hog-wild, grandfathers are bound to be wrong about everything."


Robert W. Moellenkamp hadn't heard yet that he and his wife and kids
were as broke as any convict in Athena. So when I came into the Board
Room back in 1991, he addressed me in the statesmanlike tones of a
prudent conservator of a noble legacy. He nodded in the direction of
Jason Wilder, who was then simply a Tarkington parent, not a member of
the Board. Wilder sat at the opposite end of the great oval table with
a manila folder, a tape recorder and cassettes, and a Polaroid
photograph deployed before him.

I knew who he was, of course, and something of how his mind worked,
having read his newspaper column and watched his television show from
time to time. But we had not met before. The Board members on either
side of him had crowded into one another in order to give him plenty
of room for some kind of performance.

He was the only celebrity there. He was probably the only true
celebrity ever to set foot in that Board Room.

There was 1 other non-Trustee present. That was the College President,
Henry "Tex" Johnson, whose wife Zuzu, as I've already said, I used to
make love to when he was away from home any length of time. Zuzu and I
had broken up for good about a month before, but we were still on
speaking terms.


"Please take a seat, Gene," said Moellenkamp. "Mr. Wilder, who I guess
you know is Kimberley's father, has a rather disturbing story he wants
to tell to you."

"I see," I said, a good soldier doing as he was told. I wanted to keep
my job. This was my home. When the time came, I wanted to retire here
and then be buried here. That was before it was clear that glaciers
were headed south again, and that anybody buried here, including the
gang by the stable, along with Musket Mountain itself, would
eventually wind up in Pennsylvania or West Virginia. Or Maryland.

Where else could I become a Full Professor or a college teacher of any
rank, with nothing but a Bachelor of Science Degree from West Point? I
couldn't even teach high school or grade school, since I had never
taken any of the required courses in education. At my age, which was
then 51, who would hire me for anything, and especially with a
demented wife and motherin-law in tow.

I said to the Trustees and Jason Wilder, "I believe I know most of
what the story is, ladies and gentlemen.

I've just been with Kimberley, and she gave me a pretty good rehearsal
for what I'd better say here.

"When listening to her charges against me, I can only hope you did not
lose sight of what you yourselves have learned about me during my 15
years of faithful service to Tarkington. This Board itself, surely,
can provide all the character witnesses I could ever need. If not,
bring in parents and students. Choose them at random. You know and I
know that they will all speak well of me."

I nodded respectfully in Jason Wilder's direction. "I am glad to meet
you in person, sir. I read your columns and watch your TV show
regularly. I find what you have to say invariably thought-provoking,
and so do my wife and her mother, both of them invalids." I wanted to
get that in about my 2 sick dependents, in case Wilder and a couple of
new Trustees hadn't heard about them.

Actually, I was laying it on pretty thick. Although Margaret and her
mother read to each other a lot, taking turns, and usually by
flashlight in a tent they'd made inside the house out of bedspreads
and chairs or whatever, they never read a newspaper. They didn't like
television, either, except for Sesame Street, which was supposedly for
children. The only time they saw Jason Wilder on the little screen as
far as I can remember, my mother-in-law started dancing to him as
though he were modern music.

When one of his guests on the show said something, she froze. Only
when Wilder spoke did she start to dance again.

I certainly wasn't going to tell him that.


"I want to say first," said Wilder, "that I am in nothing less than
awe, Professor Hartke, of your magnificent record in the Vietnam War.
If the American people had not lost their courage and ceased to
support you, we would be living in a very different and much better
world, and especially in Asia. I know, too, of your kindness and
understanding toward your wife and her mother, to which I am glad to
apply the same encomium your behavior earned in Vietnam, 'beyond the
call of duty.' So I am sorry to have to warn you that the story I am
about to tell you may not be nearly as simple or easy to refute as my
daughter may have led you to expect."

"Whatever it is, sir," I said, "let's hear it. Shoot."

So he did. He said that several of his friends had attended Tarkington
or sent their children here, so that he was favorably impressed with
the institution's successes with the learning-disabled long before he
entrusted his own daughter to us. An usher and a bridesmaid at his
wedding, he said, had earned Associate in the Arts and Sciences
Degrees in Scipio. The usher had gone on to be Ambassador to Iceland.
The bridesmaid was on the Board of Directors of the Chicago Symphony
Orchestra.

He felt that Tarkington's highly unconventional techniques would be
useful if applied to the country's notoriously beleaguered inner-city
schools, and he planned to say so after he had learned more about
them. The ratio of teachers to students at Tarkington, incidentally,
was then I to 6. In inner-city schools, that ratio was then 1 to 65.

There was a big campaign back then, I remember, to get the Japanese to
buy up inner-city public schools the way they were buying up prisons
and hospitals. But they were too smart. They wouldn't touch schools
for unwel come children of unwelcome parents with a 10-foot pole.


He said he hoped to write a book about Tarkington called "Little
Miracle on Lake Mohiga" or "Teaching the Unteachable." So he wired his
daughter for sound and told her to follow the best teachers in order
to record what they said and how they said it. "I wanted to learn what
it was that made them good, Professor Hartke, without their knowing
they were being studied," he said. "I wanted them to go on being
whatever they were, warts and all, without any self-consciousness."

This was the first I heard of the tapes. That chilling news explained
Kimberley's lurking, lurking, lurking all the time. Wilder spared me
the suspense, at least, of wondering what all of Kimberley's apparatus
might have overheard. He punched the playback button on the recorder
before him, and I heard myself telling Paul Slazinger, privately, I'd
thought, that the two principal currencies of the planet were the Yen
and fellatio. This was so early in the academic year that classes
hadn't begun yet! This was during Freshman Orientation Week, and I had
just told the incoming Class of 1994 that merchants and tradespeople
in the town below preferred to be paid in Japanese Yen rather than
dollars, so that the freshmen might want their parents to give them
their allowances in Yen.

I had told them, too, that they were never to go into the Black Cat
Cafe, which the townspeople considered their private club. It was one
place they could go and not be reminded of how dependent they were on
the rich kids on the hill, but I didn't say that. Neither did I say
that free-lance prostitutes were sometimes found there, and in the
past had been the cause of outbreaks of venereal disease on campus.

I had kept it simple for the freshmen: "Tarkingtonians are more than
welcome anywhere in town but the Black Cat Cafe."


If Kimberley recorded that good advice, her father did not play it
back for me. He didn't even play back what Slazinger had said to me,
and it was during a coffee break, that stimulated me to name the
planet's two most acceptable currencies. He was the agent provocateur.

What he said, as I recall, was, "They want to get paid in Yen?" He was
as new to Scipio as any freshman, and we had just met. I hadn't read
any of his books, and so far as I knew, neither had anybody else on
the faculty. He was a last-minute choice for Writer in Residence, and
had come to orientation because he was lonesome and had nothing else
to do. He wasn't supposed to be there, and he was so old, so old! He
had been sitting among all those teenagers as though he werejust
another rich kid who had bottomed out on his Scholastic Aptitude Test,
and he was old enough to be their grandfather!

He had fought in World War II! That's how old he was.

So I said to him, "They'll take dollars if they have to, but you'd
better have a wheelbarrow."

And he wanted to know if the merchants and tradespeople would also
accept fellatio. He used a vernacular word for fellatio in the plural.

But the tape began right after that, with my saying, as though out of
the blue, and as a joke, of course, only it didn't sound like a joke
during the playback, that, in effect, the whole World was for sale to
anyone who had Yen or was willing to perform fellatio.

14

So that was twice within an hour that I was accused of cynicism that
was Paul Sla.zinger's, not mine. And he was in Key West, well out of
reach of punishment, having been unemployment-proofed for 5 years with
a Genius Grant from the MacArthur Foundation. In saying what I had
about Yen and fellatio, I was being sociable with a stranger. I was
echoing him to make him feel at home in new surroundings.

As far as that goes, Professor Damon Stern, head of the History
Department and my closest male friend here, spoke as badly of his own
country as Slazinger and I did, and right into the faces of students
in the classroom day after day. I used to sit in on his course and
laugh and clap. The truth can be very funny in an awful way,
especially as it relates to greed and hypocrisy. Kimberley must have
made recordings of his words, too, and played them back for her
father. Why wasn't Damon fired right along with me?

My guess is that he was a comedian, and 1 was not. He wanted students
to leave his presence feeling good, not bad, so the atrocities and
stupidities he described were in the distant past. There was nothing a
student could do about them but laugh, laugh, laugh.

Whereas Slazinger and I talked about the last half of the 20th
Century, in which we had both been seriously wounded physically and
psychologically, which was nothing anybody but a sociopath could laugh
about.


I, too, might have been acceptable as a comedian if all Kimberley had
taped was what I said about Yen and fellatio. That was good, topical
Mohiga Valley humor, what with the Japanese taking over the prison
across the lake and arousing curiosity among the natives about the
relative values of different national currencies. The Japanese were
willing to pay their local bills in either dollars or Yen. These bills
were for small-ticket items, hardware or toiletries or whatever, which
the prison needed in a hurry, usually ordered by telephone. Big-ticket
items in quantity came from Japanese-owned suppliers in Rochester or
beyond.

So Japanese currency had started to circulate in Scipio. The prison
administrators and guards were rarely seen in town, however. They
lived in barracks to the east of the prison, and lived lives as
invisible to this side of the lake as those of the prisoners.


To the limited extent that anybody on this side of the lake thought
about the prison at all until the mass escape, people were generally
glad to have the Japanese in charge. The new proprietor had cut waste
and corruption to almost nothing. What they charged the State for
punishing its prisoners was only 75 percent of what the State used to
pay itself for identical services.

The local paper, The Valley Sentinel, sent a reporter over there to
see what the Japanese were doing differently. They were still using
the steel boxes on the back of trucks and showing old TV shows,
including news, in no particular order and around the clock. The
biggest change was that Athena was drug-free for the first time in its
history, and rich prisoners weren't able to buy privileges. The guards
weren't easily fooled or corrupted, either, since they understood so
little English, and wanted nothing more than to finish up their 6
months overseas and go home again.


A normal tour of duty in Vietnam was twice that long and 1,000 times
more dangerous. Who could blame the educated classes with political
connections for staying home?


One new wrinkle by the Japanese the reporter didn't mention was that
the guards wore surgical masks and rubber gloves when they were on
duty, even up in the towers and atop the walls. That wasn't to keep
them from spreading infections, of course. It was to ensure that they
didn't take any of their loathsome charges' loathsome diseases back
home with them.


When I went to work over there, I refused to wear gloves and a mask.
Who could teach anybody anything while wearing such a costume?

So now I have tuberculosis.

Cough, cough, cough.


Before I could protest to the Trustees that I certainly wouldn't have
said what I'd said about Yen and fellatio if I'd thought there was the
slightest chance that a student could hear me, the background noises
on the tape changed. I realized that I was about to hear something I
had said in a different location. There was the pop-pop-pop of
Ping-Pong balls, and a card player asked, "Who dealt this mess?"
Somebody else asked somebody else to bring her a hot fudge sundae
without nuts on top. She was on a diet, she said. There were rumblings
like distant artillery, which were really the sound of bowling balls
in the basement of the Pahlavi Pavilion.

Oh Lordy, was I ever drunk that night at the Pavilion. I was out of
control. And it was a disgrace that I should have appeared before
students in such a condition. I will regret it to my dying day. Cough.


It was on a cold night near the end of November of 1990, 6 months
before the Trustees fired me. I know it wasn't December, because
Slazinger was still on campus, talking openly of suicide. He hadn't
yet received his Genius Grant.

When I came home from work that afternoon, to tidy up the house and
make supper, I found an awful mess. Margaret and Mildred, both hags by
then, had torn bedsheets into strips. I had laundered the sheets that
morning, and was going to put them on our beds that night. What did
they care?

They had constructed what they said was a spider web. At least it
wasn't a hydrogen bomb.

White cotton strips spliced end to end crisscrossed every which way in
the front hail and living room. The newel post ~f the stairway was
connected to the inside doorknob of the front door, and the doorknob
was connected to the living room chandelier, and so on ad infinitum.

The day hadn't begun auspiciously anyway. I had found all 4 tires of
my Mercedes flat. A bunch of high school kids from down below, high on
alcohol or who knows what, had come up during the night like Vietcong
and gone what they called "coring" again. They not only had let the
air out of the tires of every expensive car they could find in the
open on campus, Porsches and Jaguars and Saabs and BMWs and so on, but
had taken out the valve cores. At home, I had heard, they had jars
full of valve cores or necklaces of valve cores to prove how often
they had gone coring. And they got my Mercedes. They got my Mercedes
every time.


So when I found myself tangled in Margaret and Mildred's spider web,
my nervous system came close to the breaking point. I was the one who
was going to have to clean up this mess. I was the one who was going
to have to remake the beds with other sheets, and then buy more sheets
the next day. I have always liked housework, or at least not minded it
as much as most people seem to. But this was housework beyond the
pale!

I had left the house so neat in the morning! And Margaret and Mildred
'weren't getting any fun out of watching my reactions when I was
tangled up in their spider web. They were hiding someplace where they
couldn't see or hear me. They expected me to play hide-and-seek, with
me as "it."

Something in me snapped. I wasn't going to play hide-and-seek this
time. I wasn't going to take down the spider web. I wasn't going to
prepare supper. Let them come creeping out of their hiding places in
an hour or whatever. Let them wonder, as I had when I walked into the
spider web, what on Earth had happened to their previously dependable,
forgiving Universe?

Out into the cold night I went, with no destination in mind save for
good old oblivion. I found myself in front of the house of my best
friend, Damon Stern, the entertaining professor of History. When he
was a boy in Wisconsin, he had learned how to ride a unicycle. He had
taught his wife and kids how to ride one, too.

The lights were on, but nobody was home. The family's 4 unicycles were
in the front hall and the car was gone. They never got cored. They
were smart. They drove one of the last Volkswagen Bugs still running.

I knew where they kept the liquor. I poured myself a couple of stiff
shots of bourbon, in lieu of their absent body warmth. I don't think I
had had a drink for a month before that.

I got this hot rush in my belly. Out into the night I went again. I
was automatically looking for an older woman who would make everything
all right by becoming the beast with two backs with me.

A coed would not do, not that a coed would have had anything to do
with somebody as old and relatively poor as me. I couldn't even have
promised her a better grade than she deserved. There were no grades at
Tarkington.

But I wouldn't have wanted a coed in any case. The only sort of woman
who excites me is an older one in uncomfortable circumstances, full of
doubts not only about herself but about the value of life itself.
Although I never met her personally, the late Marilyn Monroe comes to
mind, maybe 3 years before she committed suicide.

Cough, cough, cough.

If there is a Divine Providence, there is also a wicked one, provided
you agree that making love to off-balance women you aren't married to
is wickedness. My own feeling is that if adultery is wickedness then
so is food. Both make me feel so much better afterward.


Just as a hungry person knows that somewhere not far away somebody is
preparing good things to eat, I knew that night that not far away was
an older woman in despair. There had to be!

Zuzu Johnson was out of the question. Her husband was home, and she
was hosting a dinner party for a couple of grateful parents who were
giving the college a language laboratory. When it was finished,
students would be able to sit in soundproof booths and listen to
recordings of any one of more than 100 languages and dialects made by
native speakers.


The lights were on in the sculpture studio of Norman Rockwell Hall,
the art building, the only structure on campus named after a
historical figure rather than the donating family. It was another gift
from the Moellenkamps, who may have felt that too much was named after
them already.

There was a whirring and rumbling coming from in-side the sculpture
studio. Somebody was playing with the crane in there, making it run
back and forth on its tracks overhead. Whoever it was had to be
playing, since nobody ever made a piece of sculpture so big that it
could be moved only by the mighty crane.

After the prison break, there was some talk on the part of the
convicts of hanging somebody from it, and running him back and forth
while he strangled. They had no particular candidate in mind. But then
the

Niagara Power and Light Company, which was owned by the Unification
Church Korean Evangelical Association, shut off all our electricity.


Outside Rockwell Hall that night, I might have been back on a patrol
in Vietnam. That is how keen my senses were. That was how quick my
mind was to create a whole picture from the slightest clues.

I knew that the sculpture studio was locked up tight after 6:30 P.M.,
since I had tried the door many times, thinking that I might sometime
bring a lover there. I had considered getting a key somehow at the
start of the semester and learned from Buildings and Grounds that only
they and that year's Artist in Residence, the sculptress Pamela Ford
Hall, were allowed to have keys. This was because of vandalism by
either students or Townies in the studio the year before.

They knocked off the noses and fingers of replicas of Greek statues,
and defecated in a bucket of wet clay. That sort of thing.


So that had to be Pamela Ford Hall in there making the crane go back
and forth. And the crane's restless travels had to represent
unhappiness, not any masterpiece she was creating. What use did she
have for a crane, or even a wheelbarrow, since she worked exclusively
in nearly weightless polyurethane. And she was a recent divorc?e
without children. And, because she knew my reputation, I'm sure, she
had been avoiding me.

I climbed up on the studio's loading dock. I thumped my fist on its
enormous sliding door. The door was motor driven. She had only to
press a button to let me in.


The crane stopped going back and forth. There was a hopeful sign!

She asked through the door what I wanted.

"I wanted to make sure you were OK in there," I said.

"Who are you to care whether I'm OK or not in here?" she said.

"Gene Hartke," I said.

She opened the door just a crack and stared out at me, but didn't say
anything. Then she opened the door wider, and I could see she was
holding an uncorked bottle of what would turn out to be blackberry
brandy.

"Hello, Soldier," she said.

"Hi," I said very carefully.

And then she said, "What took you so long?"


15

Pamela sure got me drunk that night, and we made love. And then I
spilled my guts about the Vietnam War in front of a bunch of students
at the Pahlavi Pavilion. And Kimberley Wilder recorded me.


I had never tasted blackberry brandy before. I never want to taste it
again. It did bad things to me. It made me a crybaby about the war.
That is something I swore I would never be.


If I could order any drink I wanted now, it would be a Sweet Rob Roy
on the Rocks, a Manhattan made with Scotch. That was another drink a
woman introduced me to, and it made me laugh instead of cry, and fall
in love with the woman who said to try one.

That was in Manila, after the excrement hit the airconditioning in
Saigon. She was Harriet Gummer, the war correspondent from Iowa. She
had a son by me without telling me.

His name? Rob Roy.

After we made love, Pamela asked me the same question Harriet had
asked me in Manila 15 years earlier. It was something they both had to
know. They both asked me if I had killed anybody in the war.

I said to Pamela what I had said to Harriet: "If I were a fighter
plane instead of a human being, there would be little pictures of
people painted all over me."

I should have gone straight home after saying that. But I went over to
the Pavilion instead. I needed a bigger audience for that great line
of mine.

So I barged into a group of students sitting in front of the great
fireplace in the main lounge. After the prison break, that fireplace
would be used for cooking horse meat and dogs. I got between the
students and the fire, so there was no way they could ignore me, and I
said to them, "If I were a fighter plane instead of a human being,
there would be little pictures of people painted all over me."

I went on from there.


I was so full of self-pity! That was what I found unbearable when
Jason Wilder played back my words to me. I was so drunk that I acted
like a victim!


The scenes of unspeakable cruelty and stupidity and waste I described
that night were no more horrible than ultrarealistic shows about
Vietnam, which had become staples of TV entertainment. When I told the
students about the severed human head I saw nestled in the guts of a
water buffalo, to them, I'm sure, the head might as well have been
made of wax, and the guts those of some big animal which may or may
not have belonged to a real water buffalo.

What difference could it make whether the head was or was not wax, or
whether the guts were or were not those of a water buffalo?

No difference.


"Professor Hartke," Jason Wilder said to me gently, reasonably, when
the tape had reached its end, "why on Earth would you want to tell
such tales to young people who need to love their country?"

I wanted to keep my job so much, and the house which came with it,
that my reply was asinine. "I was telling them history," I said, "and
I had had a little too much to drink. I don't usually drink that
much."

"I'm sure," he said. "I am told that you are a man with many problems,
but that alcohol has not appeared among them with any consistency. So
let us say that your performance in the Pavilion was a well-intended
history lesson of which you accidentally lost control."

"That's what it was, sir," I said.

His balletic hands flitted in time to the logic of his thoughts before
he spoke again. He was a fellow pianist. And then he said, "First of
all, you were not hired to teach History. Second of all, the students
who come to Tarkington need no further instructions in how it feels to
be defeated. They would not be here if they themselves had not failed
and failed. The Miracle on Lake Mohiga for more than a century now, as
I see it, has been to make children who have failed and failed start
thinking of victory, stop thinking about the hopelessness of it all."

"There was just that one time," I said, "and I'm sorry."


Cough. One cough.

Wilder said he didn't consider a teacher who was negative about
everything a teacher. "I would call a person like that an 'unteacher.'
He's somebody who takes things out of young people's heads instead of
putting more things in."

"I don't know as I'm negative about everything," I


"What's the first thing students see when they walk into the library?"
he said.

"Books?" I said.

"All those perpetual-motion machines," he said. "I saw that display,
and I read the sign on the wall above it. I had no idea then that you
were responsible for the sign."

He was talking about the sign that said "THE COMPLICATED FUTILITY OF
IGNORANCE."


"All I knew was that I didn't want my daughter or anybody's child to
see a message that negative every time she comes into the library," he
said. "And then I found out it was you who was responsible for it."

"What's so negative about it?" I said.

"What could be a more negative word than 'futility'?" he said.

'Ignorance,' " I said.

"There you are," he said. I had somehow won his argument for him.

"I don't understand," I said.

"Precisely," he said. "You obviously do not understand how easily
discouraged the typical Tarkington student is, how sensitive to
suggestions that he or she should quit trying to be smart. That's what
the word 'futile' means: 'Quit, quit, quit.'

"And what does 'ignorance' mean?" I said.

"If you put it up on the wall and give it the promi nence you have,"
he said, "it's a nasty echo of what so many Tarkingtonians were
hearing before they got here: 'You're dumb, you're dumb, you're dumb.'
And of course they aren't dumb."

"I never said they were," I protested.

"You reinforce their low self-esteem without realizing what you are
doing," he said. "You also upset them with humor appropriate to a
barracks, but certainly not to an institution of higher learning."

"You mean about Yen and fellatio?" I said. "I would never have said it
if I'd thought a student could hear me."

"I am talking about the entrance hail of the library again," he said.

"I can't think of what else is in there that might have offended you,"
I said.

"It wasn't I who was offended," he said. "It was my daughter."

"I give up," I said. I wasn't being impudent. I was abject.

"On the same day Kimberley heard you talk about Yen and fellatio,
before classes had even begun," he said, "a senior led her and the
other freshmen to the library and solemnly told them that the bell
clappers on the wall were petrified penises. That was surely barracks
humor the senior had picked up from you."

For once I didn't have to defend myself. Several of the Trustees
assured Wilder that telling freshmen that the clappers were penises
was a tradition that antedated my arrival on campus by at least 20
years.

But that was the only time they defended me, although I of them had
been my student, Madelaine Astor, n?e Peabody, and 5 of them were
parents of those I had taught. Madelaine dictated a letter to me
afterward, explaining that Jason Wilder had promised to denounce the
college in his column and on his TV show if the Trustees did not fire
me.

So they dared not come to my assistance.


She said, too, that since she, like Wilder, was a Roman Catholic, she
was shocked to hear me say on tape that Hitler was a Roman Catholic,
and that the Nazis painted crosses on their tanks and airplanes
be-cause they considered themselves a Christian army. Wilder had
played that tape right after I had been cleared of all responsibility
for freshmen's being told that the clappers were penises.

Once again I was in deep trouble for merely repeating what somebody
else had said. It wasn't something my grandfather had said this time,
or somebody else who couldn't be hurt by the Trustees, like Paul
Slazinger. It was something my best friend Damon Stern had said in a
History class only a couple of months before.

If Jason Wilder thought I was an unteacher, he should have heard Damon
Stern! Then again, Stern never told the awful truth about supposedly
noble human actions in recent times. Everything he debunked had to
have transpired before 1950, say.

So I happened to sit in on a class where he talked about Hitler's
being a devout Roman Catholic. He said something I hadn't realized
before, something I have since discovered most Christians don't want
to hear:

that the Nazi swastika was intended to be a version of a Christian
cross, a cross made out of axes. Stern said that Christians had gone
to a lot of trouble denying that the swastika was just another cross,
saying it was a primitive symbol from the primordial ooze of the pagan
past.

And the Nazis' most valuable military decoration was the Iron Cross.

And the Nazis painted regular crosses on all their tanks and
airplanes.

I came out of that class looking sort of dazed, I guess. Who should I
run into but Kimberley Wilder?

"What did he say today?" she said.

"Hitler was a Christian," I said. "The swastika was a Christian
cross."

She got it on tape.


I didn't rat on Damon Stern to the Trustees. Tarkington wasn't West
Point, where it was an honor to squeal.


Madelaine agreed with Wilder, too, she said in her letter, that I
should not have told my Physics students that the Russians, not the
Americans, were the first to make a hydrogen bomb that was portable
enough to be used as a weapon. "Even if it's true," she wrote, "which
I don't believe, you had no business teffing them that."

She said, moreover, that perpetual motion was possible, if only
scientists would work harder on it.

She had certainly backslid intellectually since passing her orals for
her Associate in the Arts and Sciences Degree.


I used to tell classes that anybody who believed in the possibility of
perpetual motion should be boiled alive like a lobster.

I was also a stickler about the Metric System. I was famous for
turning my back on students who mentioned feet or pounds or miles to
me.

They hated that.

I didn't dare teach like that in the prison across the lake, of
course.

Then again, most of the convicts had been in the drug business, and
were either Third World people or dealt with Third World people. So
the Metric System was old stuff to them.


Rather than rat on Damon Stern about the Nazis' being Christians, I
told the Trustees that I had heard it on National Public Radio. I said
I was very sorry about having passed it on to a student. "I feel like
biting off my tongue," I said.

"What does Hitler have to do with either Physics or Music
Appreciation?" said Wilder.

I might have replied that Hitler probably didn't know any more about
physics than the Board of Trustees, but that he loved music. Every
time a concert hail was bombed, I heard somewhere, he had it rebuilt
immediately as a matter of top priority. I think I may actually have
learned that from National Public Radio.

I said instead, "If I'd known I upset Kimberley as much as you say I
did, I would certainly have apologized. I had no idea, sir. She gave
no sign."


What made me weak was the realization that I had been mistaken to
think that I was with family there in the Board Room, that all
Tarkingtonians and their parents and guardians had come to regard me
as an uncle. My goodness¡Xthe family secrets I had learned over the
years and kept to myself! My lips were sealed. What a faithful old
retainer I was! But that was all I was to the Trustees, and probably
to the students, too.

I wasn't an uncle. I was a member of the Servant Class.

They were letting me go.

Soldiers are discharged. People in the workplace are fired. Servants
are let go.

"Am I being fired?" I asked the Chairman of the Board incredulously.

"I'm sorry, Gene," he said, "but we're going to have to let you go."


The President of the college, Tex Johnson, sitting two chairs away
from me, hadn't let out a peep. He looked sick. I surmised mistakenly
that he had been scolded for having let me stay on the faculty long
enough to get tenure. He was sick about something more personal, which
still had a lot to do with Professor Eugene Debs Hartke.

He had been brought in as President from Rollins College down in
Winter Park, Florida, where he had been Provost, after Sam Wakefield
did the big trick of suicide. Henry "Tex" Johnson held a Bachelor's
Degree in Business Administration from Texas Tech in Lubbock, and
claimed to be a descendant of a man who had died in the Alamo. Damon
Stern, who was always turning up little-known facts of history, told
me, incidentally, that the Battle of the Alamo was about slavery. The
brave men who died there wanted to secede from Mexico because it was
against the law to own slaves in Mexico. They were fighting for the
right to own slaves.

Since Tex's wife and I had been lovers, I knew that his ancestors
weren't Texans, but Lithuanians. His father, whose name certainly
wasn't Johnson, was a Lithuanian second mate on a Russian freighter
who jumped ship when it put in for emergency repairs at Corpus
Christi. Zuzu told me that Tex's father was not only an illegal
immigrant but the nephew of the former Communist boss of Lithuania.

So much for the Alamo.


I turned to him at the Board meeting, and I said, "Tex¡Xfor pity
sakes, say something! You know darn good and well I'm the best teacher
you've got! I don't say that. The students do! Is the whole faculty
going to be brought before this Board, or am I the only one? Tex?"

He stared straight ahead. He seemed to have turned to cement. "Tex?"
Some leadership!

I put the same question to the Chairman, who had been pauperized by
Microsecond Arbitrage but didn't know it yet. "Bob¡X" I began.

He winced.

I began again, having gotten the message in spades that I was a
servant and not a relative: "Mr. Moellenkamp, sir¡X" I said, "you know
darn well, and so does everybody else here, that you can follow the
most patriotic, deeply religious American who ever lived with a tape
recorder for a year, and then prove that he's a worse traitor than
Benedict Arnold, and a worshipper of the Devil. Who doesn't say things
in a moment of passion or absentmindedness that he doesn't wish he
could take back? So I ask again, am I the only one this was done to,
and if so, why?"

He froze.

"Madelaine?" I said to Madelaine Astor, who would later write me such
a dumb letter.

She said she did not like it that I had told students that a new Ice
Age was on its way, even if I had read it in The New York Tunes. That
was another thing I'd said that Wilder had on tape. At least it had
something to do with science, and at least it wasn't something I had
picked up from Slazinger or Grandfather Wills or Damon Stern. At least
it was the real me.

"The students here have enough to worry about," she said. "I know I
did."

She went on to say that there had always been people who had tried to
become famous by saying that the World was going to end, but the World
hadn't ended.

There were nods of agreement all around the table. I don't think there
was a soul there who knew anything about science.

"When I was here you were predicting the end of the World," she said,
"only it was atomic waste and acid rain that were going to kill us.
But here we are. I feel fine. Doesn't everybody else feel fine? So
pooh."

She shrugged. "About the rest of it," she said, "I'm sorry I heard
about it. It made me sick. If we have to go over it again, I think
I'll just leave the room."

Heavens to Betsy! What could she have meant by "the rest of it"? What
could it be that they had gone over once, and were going to have to go
over again with me there? Hadn't I already heard the worst?

No.

16

"The rest of it" was in a manila folder in front of Jason Wilder. So
there is Manila playing a big part in my life again. No Sweet Rob Roys
on the Rocks this time.

In the folder was a report by a private detective hired by Wilder to
investigate my sex life. It covered only the second semester, and so
missed the episode in the sculpture studio. The gumshoe recorded 3 of
7 subsequent trysts with the Artist in Residence, 2 with a woman from
a jewelry company taking orders for class rings, and maybe 30 with
Zuzu Johnson, the wife of the President. He didn't miss a thing Zuzu
and I did during the second semester. There was only 1 misunderstood
incident:

when I went up into the loft of the stable, where the Lutz Carillon
had been stored before there was a tower and where Tex Johnson was
crucified 2 years ago. I went up with the aunt of a student. She was
an architect who wanted to see the pegged post-and-beam joinery up
there. The operative assumed we made love up there. We hadn't.

We made love much later that afternoon, in a toolshed by the stable,
in the shadow of Musket Mountain when the Sun goes down.


I wasn't to see the contents of Wilder's folder for another 10 minutes
or so. Wilder and a couple of others wanted to go on discussing what
really bothered them about me, which was what I had been doing,
supposedly, to the students' minds. My sexual promiscuity among older
women wasn't of much interest to them, the College President excepted,
save as a handy something for which I could be fired without raising
the gummy question of whether or not my rights under the First
Amendment of the Constitution had been violated.

Adultery was the bullet they would put in my brain, so to speak, after
I had been turned to Swiss cheese by the firing squad.


To Tex Johnson, the closet Lithuanian, the contents of the folder were
more than a gadget for diddling me out of tenure. They were a worse
humiliation for Tex than they were for me.

At least they said that my love affair with his wife was over.

He stood up. He asked to be excused. He said that he would just as
soon not be present when the Trustees went over for the second time
what Madelaine had called "the rest of it."

He was excused, and was apparently about to leave without saying
anything. But then, with one hand on the doorknob, he uttered two
words chokingly, which were the title of a novel by Gustave Flaubert.
It was about a wife who was bored with her husband, who had an
exceedingly silly love affair and then committed suicide.

"Madame Bovary," he said. And then he was gone.


He was a cuckold in the present, and crucifixion awaited him in the
future. I wonder if his father would have jumped ship in Corpus
Christi if he had known what an unhappy end his only son would come to
under American Free Enterprise.


I had read Madame Bovary at West Point. All cadets in my day had to
read it, so that we could demonstrate to cultivated people that we,
too, were cultivated, should we ever face that challenge. Jack Patton
and I read it at the same time for the same class. I asked him
afterward what he thought of it. Predictably, he said he had to laugh
like hell.

He said the same thing about Othello and Hamlet and Romeo and Juliet.


I confess that to this day I have come to no firm conclusions about
how smart or dumb Jack Patton really was. This leaves me in doubt
about the meaning of a birthday present he sent me in Vietnam shortly
before the sniper killed him with a beautiful shot in Hue, pronounced
"whay." It was a gift-wrapped copy of a stroke magazine called Black
Garterbelt. But did he send it to me for its pictures of women naked
except for black garterbelts, or for a remarkable science fiction
story in there, "The Protocols of the Elders of Tralfamadore"?

But more about that later.


I have no idea how many of the Trustees had read Madame Bovary. Two of
them would have had to have it read aloud to them. So I was not alone
in wondering why Tex Johnson would have said, his hand on the
doorknob, "Madame Bovary."

If I had been Tex, I think I might have gotten off the campus as fast
as possible, and maybe drowned my sorrows among the nonacademics at
the Black Cat Cafe. That was where I was going to wind up that
afternoon. It would have been funny in retrospect if we had wound up
as a couple of sloshed buddies at the Black Cat Cafe.


Imagine my saying to him or his saying to me, both of us drunk as
skunks, "I love you, you old son of a gun. Do you know that?"


One Trustee had it in for me on personal grounds. That was Sydney
Stone, who was said to have amassed a fortune of more than
$1,000,000,000 in 10 short years, mainly in commissions for arranging
sales of American properties to foreigners. His masterpiece, maybe,
was the transfer of ownership of my father's former employer, E. I.
Dii Pont de Nemours & Company, to I. G. Farben in Germany.

"There is much I could probably forgive, if somebody put a gun to my
head, Professor Hartke," he said, "but not what you did to my son." He
himself was no Tarkingtonian. He was a graduate of the Harvard
Business School and the London School of Economics.

"Fred?" I said.

"In case you haven't noticed," he said, "I have only 1 son in
Tarkington. I have only 1 son anywhere." Presumably this I son,
without having to lift a finger, would himself 1 day have
$1,000,000,000.

"What did I do to Fred?" I said.

"You know what you did to Fred," he said.

What I had done to Fred was catch him stealing a Tarkington beer mug
from the college bookstore. What Fred Stone did was beyond mere
stealing. He took the beer mug off the shelf, drank make-believe
toasts to me and the cashier, who were the only other people there,
and then walked out.

I had just come from a faculty meeting where the campus theft problem
had been discussed for the umpteenth time. The manager of the
bookstore told us that only one comparable institution had a higher
percentage of its merchandise stolen than his, which was the Harvard
Coop in Cambridge.

So I followed Fred Stone out to the Quadrangle. He was headed for his
Kawasaki motorcycle in the student parking lot. I came up behind him
and said quietly, with all possible politeness, "I think you should
put that beer mug back where you got it, Fred. Either that or pay for
it."

"Oh, yeah?" he said. "Is that what you think?" Then he smashed the mug
to smithereens on the rim of the Vonnegut Memorial Fountain. "If
that's what you think," he said, "then you're the one who should put
it back."

I reported the incident to Tex Johnson, who told me to forget it.

But I was mad. So I wrote a letter about it to the boy's father, but
never got an answer until the Board meeting.

"I can never forgive you for accusing my son of theft," the father
said. He quoted Shakespeare on behalf of Fred. I was supposed to
imagine Fred's saying it tome.

"'Who steals my purse steals trash; 'tis something, nothing,' "he
said." ' 'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands,' " he
went on, "'but he that filches from me my good name robs me of that
Which not enriches him and makes me poor indeed.'"

"If I was wrong, sir, I apologize," I said.

"Too late," he said.


17

There was 1 Trustee I was sure was my friend. He would have found what
I said on tape funny and interesting. But he wasn't there. His name
was Ed Bergeron, and we had had a lot of good talks about the
deterioration of the environment and the abuses of trust in the stock
market and the banking industry and so on. He could top me for
pessimism any day.

His wealth was as old as the Moellenkamps', and was based on ancestral
oil fields and coal mines and railroads which he had sold to
foreigners in order to devote himself full-time to nature study and
conservation. He was President of the Wildlife Rescue Federation, and
his photographs of wildlife on the Galapagos Islands had been
published in National Geographic. The magazine gave him the cover,
too, which showed a marine iguana digesting seaweed in the sunshine,
right next to a skinny penguin who was no doubt having thoughts about
entirely different issues of the day, whatever was going on that day.

Not only was Ed Bergeron my doomsday pal. He was also a veteran of
several debates about environmentalism with Jason Wilder on Wilder's
TV show. I haven't found a tape of any of those ding-dong
head-to-heads in this library, but there used to be 1 at the prison.
It would bob up about every 6 months on the TV sets there, which were
running all the time.

In it, I remember, Wilder said that the trouble with conservationists
was that they never considered the costs in terms of jobs and living
standards of eliminating fossil fuels or doing something with garbage
other than dumping it in the ocean, and so on.

Ed Bergeron said to him, "Good! Then I can write the epitaph for this
once salubrious blue-green orb." He meant the planet.

Wilder gave him his supercilious, vulpine, patronizing, silky
debater's grin. "A majority of the scientific community," he said,
"would say, if I'm not mistaken, that an epitaph would be premature by
several thousand years." That debate took place maybe 6 years before I
was fired, which would be back in 1985, and I don't know what
scientific community he was talking about. Every kind of scientist,
all the way down to chiropractors and podiatrists, was saying we were
killing the planet fast.

"You want to hear the epitaph?" said Ed Bergeron.

"If we must," said Wilder, and the grin went on and on. "I have to
tell you, though, that you are not the first person to say the game
was all over for the human race. I'm sure that even in Egypt before
the first pyramid was constructed, there were men who attracted a
following by saying, 'It's all over now.'"

"What is different about now as compared with Egypt before the first
pyramid was built¡X" Ed began.

"And before the Chinese invented printing, and before Columbus
discovered America," Jason Wilder interjected.

"Exactly," said Bergeron.

"The difference is that we have the misfortune of knowing what's
really going on," said Bergeron, "which is no fun at all. And this has
given rise to a whole new class of preening, narcissistic quacks like
yourself who say in the service of rich and shameless polluters that
the state of the atmosphere and the water and the topsoil on which all
life depends is as debatable as how many angels can dance on the fuzz
of a tennis ball."

He was angry.


When this old tape was played at Athena before the great escape, it
kindled considerable interest. I watched it and listened with several
students of mine. Afterward one of them said to me, "Who right,
Professor¡Xbeard or mustache?" Wilder had a mustache. Bergeron had a
beard.

"Beard," I said.

That may have been almost the last word I said to a convict before the
prison break, before my mother-in-law decided that it was at last time
to talk about her big pickerel.


Bergeron's epitaph for the planet, I remember, which he said should be
carved in big letters in a wall of the Grand Canyon for the
flying-saucer people to find, was this:


WE COULD HAVE SAVED IT,


BUT WE WERE TOO DOGGONE CHEAP.

Only he didn't say "doggone."


But I would never see or hear from Ed Bergeron again. He resigned from
the Board soon after I was fired, and so would miss being taken
hostage by the convicts. It would have been interesting to hear what
he had to say to and about that particular kind of captor. One thing
he used to say to me, and to a class of mine he spoke to one time, was
that man was the weather now. Man was the tornadoes, man was the
hailstones, man was the floods. So he might have said that Scipio was
Pompeii, and the escapees were a lava flow.

He didn't resign from the Board on account of my firing. He had at
least two personal tragedies, one right on top of the other. A company
he inherited made all sorts of products out of asbestos, whose dust
proved to be as carcinogenic as any substance yet identified, with the
exception of epoxy cement and some of the radioactive stuff
accidentally turned loose in the air and aquifers around nuclear
weapons factories and power plants. He felt terrible about this, he
told me, although he had never laid eyes on any of the factories that
made the stuff. He sold them for practically nothing, since the
company in Singapore that bought them got all the lawsuits along with
the machinery and buildings, and an inventory of finished materials
which was huge and unsalable in this country. The people in Singapore
did what Ed couldn't bring himself to do, which was to sell all those
floor tiles and roofing and so on to emerging nations in Africa.

And then his son Bruce, Tarkington Class of '85, who was a homosexual,
joined the Ice Capades as a chorus boy. That was all right with Ed,
who understood that some people were born homosexual and that was
that.


And Bruce was so happy with the ice show. He was not only a good
skater but maybe the best male or female dancer at Tarkington. Bruce
used to come over to the house and dance with my mother-in-law
sometimes, just for the sake of dancing. He said she was the best
dance partner he had ever had, and she returned the compliment.

I didn't tell her when, 4 years after he graduated, he was found
strangled with his own belt, and with something like 100 stab wounds,
in a motel outside of Dubuque. So there was Dubuque again.


18

Shake~a1~

I think William Shakespeare was the wisest human being I ever heard
of. To be perfectly frank, though, that's not saying much. We are
impossibly conceited animals, and actually dumb as heck. Ask any
teacher. You don't even have to ask a teacher. Ask anybody. Dogs and
cats are smarter than we are.

If I say that the Trustees of Tarkington College were dummies, and
that the people who got us involved in the Vietnam War were dummies, I
hope it is understood that I consider myself the biggest dummy of all.
Look at where I am now, and how hard I worked to get here and nowhere
else. Bingo!

And if! feel that my father was a horse's fundament and my mother was
a horse's fundament, what can I be but another horse's fundament? Ask
my kids, both legitimate and illegitimate. They know.

I didn't have a Chinaman's chance with the Trustees, if I may be
forgiven a racist clich?¡Xnot with the sex stuff Wilder had concealed
in the folder. When I defended myself against him, I had no idea how
well armed he was-a basic situation in the funniest slapstick
comedies.

I argued that it was a teacher's duty to speak frankly to students of
college age about all sorts of concerns of humankind, not just the
subject of a course as stated in the catalogue. "That's how we gain
their trust, and encourage them to speak up as well," I said, "and
realize that all subjects do not reside in neat little compartments,
but are continuous and inseparable from the one big subject we have
been put on Earth to study, which is life itself."

I said that the doubts I might have raised in the students' minds
about the virtues of the Free Enterprise System, when telling them
what my grandfather believed, could in the long run only strengthen
their enthusiasm for that system. It made them think up reasons of
their own for why Free Enterprise was the only system worth
considering. "People are never stronger," I said, "than when they have
thought up their own arguments for believing what they believe. They
stand on their own 2 feet that way."

"Did you or did you not say that the United States was a crock of
doo-doo?" said Wilder.

I had to think a minute. This wasn't something Kimberley had gotten on
tape. "What I may have said," I replied, "is that all nations bigger
than Denmark are crocks of doo-doo, but that was a joke, of course."


I now stand behind that statement 100 percent. All nations bigger than
Denmark are crocks of doo-doo.

Jason Wilder had heard enough. He asked the Trustees to pass the
folder from hand to hand down the table to me. He said, "Before you
see what's inside, you should know that this Board promised me that
its contents would never be mentioned outside this room. It will
remain in your sole possession, provided that you submit your
resignation immediately."

"My goodness¡X" I said, "what could be in here? And what made Tex
Johnson run out of the room the way he did?"

"The bottommost document," said Wilder, "was painful for him to
read."

"What can it be?" I said. I honestly couldn't imagine how I might have
caused Tex pain. When I made love to his wife, I only wanted to make
the 2 of us happier. I didn't think of her as somebody's wife. When I
make love to a woman, the farthest thing from my mind is whom she may
be married to. I can't speak for Zuzu, but I myself had no wish to
cause Tex even a little pain. When Zuzu spoke contemptuously of him, I
had to remember who he was, and then I stuck up for him.


My first impression of the bottommost document in the folder is that
it was a timetable of some sort, maybe for the bus from Scipio to
Rochester, a not very subtle hint that I should get out of town as
soon as possible. But then I realized that what was doing all the
arriving and departing was me, and that the depot, so to speak, was
the home of the College President.

The accuracy of the times and dates was attested to by Terrence W.
Steel, Jr., whom I had known simply as Terry. I hadn't known his full
name, and believed him to be what he was said to be, a new gardener
working for Buildings and Grounds. He was in fact the private
detective Wilder hired to get the goods on me. What little he had told
me about himself may have been invented by GRIOT~, or much of it could
have been true. Who knows? Who cares?

He told me, I remember, that his wife had discovered she was a
lesbian, and fell in love with a female junior high school dietitian.
Then both women disappeared along with his 3 kids. GRIOT~ could have
cooked that up.


The timetable about me and Zuzu was signed by the detective and
notarized. I knew the Notary. Everybody did. He was Lyle Hooper, the
Fire Chief and owner of the Black Cat Cafe. He, too, would be killed
soon after the prison break. That document with his seal was all I
needed to see in order to understand that my tenure was down the
toilet.

Wilder said that the rest of the papers in the folder were affidavits
gathered by his detective. They attested to my having been a shameless
adulterer from the moment I and my family hit Scipio. "I expect you to
agree with me," he said, "that your behavior in this valley would fall
dead center into even the narrowest definition of moral turpitude."

I put the folder flat on the table to indicate that I had no need to
look inside. My gesture was like folding a poker hand. In so doing, I
would lay it on top of the school's annual Treasurer's Report, one
copy of which had been put at every seat before the meeting. I would
inadvertently take the report with me when I left, learning later from
it something I hadn't known before. The college had sold all its
property in the town below, including the ruins of the brewery and the
wagon fac tory and the carpet mills and the land under the Black Cat
Cafe, to the same Japanese corporation which owned the prison.


And then the Treasurer had put the proceeds of the sale, less real
estate commissions and lawyers' fees, into preferred stock in
Microsecond Arbitrage.


"This is not a happy moment in my life," said Wilder.

"Nor mine," I said.

"Unfortunately for all of us," he said, "the moving finger writes;
and, having writ, moves on."

"You said a mouthful," I said.

Now the Chairman of the Board, Robert Moellenkamp, spoke up. He was
illiterate, but legendary among Tarkingtonians, and no doubt back
home, too, for his phenomenal memory. Like the father of the founder
of the college, his ancestor, he could learn by heart anything that
was read out loud to him 3 times or so. I knew several convicts at
Athena, also illiterate, who could do that, too.

He wanted to quote Shakespeare now. "I want it on the record," he
said, "that this has been an extremely painful episode for me as
well." And then he delivered this speech from Shakespeare's Romeo and
Juliet, in which the dying Mercutio, Romeo's gallant and witty best
friend, describes the wound he received in a duel:

"No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door; but
'tis enough, 'twill serve: ask for me tomorrow, and you shall find me
a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague on
both your houses!"

The two houses, of course, were the Montagues and the Capulets, the
feuding families of Romeo and Juliet, whose nitwit hatred would
indirectly cause Mercutio's departure for Paradise.


I have lifted this speech from Bartlett's Familiar Quotations. If more
people would acknowledge that they got their pearls of wisdom from
that book instead of the original, it might clear the air.


If there really had been a Mercutio, and if there really were a
Paradise, Mercutio might be hanging out with teenage Vietnam draftee
casualties now, talking about what it felt like to die for other
people's vanity and foolishness.


19

When I heard a few months later, after I had gone to work at Athena,
that Robert Moellenkamp had been wiped out and then some by
Microsecond Arbitrage, and had had to sell his boats and his horses
and his El Greco and all that, I assumed he quit the Board.
Tarkington's Trustees were expected to give a lot of money to the
college every year. Otherwise why would Lowell Chung's mother, who had
to have everything that was said at meetings translated into Chinese,
have been tolerated as a member of the Board?

Actually, I don't think Mrs. Chung would have become a member if
another Trustee, a Caucasian Tarkington classmate of Moellenkamp's,
John W. Fedders, Jr., hadn't grown up in Hong Kong, and so could serve
as her interpreter. His father was an importer of ivory and rhinoceros
horns, which many Orientals believed to be aphrodisiacs. He also
traded, it was suspected, in industrial quantities of opium. Fedders
was perhaps the most conceited man I ever saw out of uniform. He
thought his fluency in Chinese made him as brilliant as a nuclear
physicist, as though 1,000,000,000 other people, including, no doubt,
1,000,000 morons, couldn't speak Chinese.

When I met with the Trustees 2 years ago, and they had become hostages
in the stable, I was surprised to see Moellenkamp. He had been allowed
to stay on the Board, even though he didn't have a nickel. Mrs. Chung
had dropped out by then. Fedders was there. Wilder, as I've said, had
since become a Trustee. There were some other new Trustees I didn't
know.


All the Trustees survived the ordeal of captivity, with nothing to eat
but horse meat roasted over burning furniture in the huge fireplace in
the Pavilion, although Fedders would be the worse for an untreated
heart attack. While he was going through the worst of it, he spoke
Chinese.


I wouldn't be under indictment now if I hadn't paid a compassionate
visit to the hostages. They wouldn't have known that I was within
1,000 kilometers of Scipio. But when I appeared to them, seemingly
free to come and go as I pleased, and treated with deference by the
Black man who was actually guarding me, they jumped to the conclusion
that I was the mastermind behind the great escape.

It was a racist conclusion, based on the belief that Black people
couldn't mastermind anything. I will say so in court.


In Vietnam, though, I really was the mastermind. Yes, and that still
bothers me. During my last year there, when my ammunition was language
instead of bullets, I invented justifications for all the killing and
dying we were doing which impressed even me! I was a genius of lethal
hocus pocus!

You want to know how I used to begin my speeches to fresh troops who
hadn't yet been fed into the meat grinder? I squared my shoulders and
threw out my chest so they could see all my ribbons, and I roared
through a bullhorn, "Men, I want you to listen, and to listen good!"

And they did, they did.


I have been wondering lately how many human beings I actually killed
with conventional weaponry. I don't believe it was my conscience which
suggested that I do this. It was the list of women I was making,
trying to remember all the names and faces and places and dates, which
led to the logical question: "Why not list all you've killed?"

So I think I will. It can't be a list of names, since I never knew the
name of anybody I killed. It has to be a list of dates and places. If
my list of women isn't to include high school or prostitutes, then my
list of those whose lives I took shouldn't include possibles and
probables, or those killed by artillery or air strikes called in by
me, and surely not all those, many of them Americans, who died as an
indirect result of all my hocus pocus, all my blah blah blah.


I have long had a sort of ballpark figure in my head. I am quite sure
that I killed more people than did my brother-in-law. I hadn't been
working as a teacher at Athena very long before it occurred to me that
I had almost certainly killed more people than had the mass murderer
Alton Darwin or anybody else serving time in there. That didn't
trouble me, and still doesn't. I just think it is interesting.

It is like an old movie. Does that mean that something is wrong with
me?


My lawyer, a mere stripling, has paid me a call. Since I have no
money, the Federal Government is paying him to protect me from
injustice. Moreover, I cannot be tortured or otherwise compelled to
testify against myself. What a Utopia!

Among my fellow prisoners here, and the I,000s upon 1,000s of those
across the lake, you better believe there's a lot of jubilation about
the Bill of Rights.


I told my lawyer about the two lists I am making. How can he help me
if I don't tell him everything.

"Why are you making them?" he said.

"To speed things up on Judgment Day," I said.

"I thought you were an Atheist," he said. He was hoping the
Prosecuting Attorney wouldn't get wind of that.

"You never know," I said.

"I'm Jewish," he said.

"I know that, and I pity you," I said.

"Why do you pity me?" he said.

I said, "You're trying to get through life with only half a Bible.
That's like trying to get from here to San Francisco with a road map
that stops at Dubuque, Iowa."


I told him I wanted to be buried with my 2 lists, so that, if there
really was going to be a Judgment Day, I could say to the Judge,
"Judge, I have found a way to save you some precious time in Eternity.
You don't have to look me up in the Book in Which All Things Are
Recorded. Here's a list of my worst sins. Send me straight to Hell,
and no argument."

He asked to see the 2 lists, so I showed him what I had written down
so far. He was delighted, and especially by their messiness. There
were all sorts of marginal notes about this or that woman or this or
that corpse.

"The messier the better," he said.

"How so?" I said.

And he said, "Any fair-minded jury looking at them will have to
believe that you are in a deeply disturbed mental state, and probably
have been for quite some time. They will already believe that all you
Vietnam veterans are crazy, because that's their reputation."

"But the lists aren't based on hallucinations," I protested. "I'm not
getting them from a radio set the CIA or the flying-saucer people put
in my skull while I was sleeping. It all really happened."

"All the same," he said serenely. "All the same, all the same."

20

After Robert Moellenkamp, broke-and-didn't-know-it, said so grandly,
"A plague on both your houses!" Jason Wilder commented that he did not
feel, in the case under discussion, my case, that 2 houses were
involved.

"I don't believe there is 2 of anything involved," he said. "I venture
to say that even Mr. Hartke now agrees that this Board cannot conceive
of any alternative to accepting his resignation. Am I right, Mr.
Hartke?"

I got to my feet. "This is the second worst day of my life," I said.
"The first was the day we got kicked out of Vietnam. Shakespeare has
been quoted twice so far. It so happens that I can quote him, too. I
have always been bad at memorizing, but I had an English teacher in
high school who insisted that everyone in her class know his most
famous lines by heart. I never expected to speak them as being
meaningful to me in real life, but now's the time. Here goes:

"'To be, or not to be: that is the question: Whether 'tis nobler in
the mind to suffer the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, or to
take arms against a sea of troubles, and by opposing end them?

"'To die: to sleep; no more; and by a sleep to say we end the
heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks that flesh is heir to, 'tis
a consummation devoutly to be wished.

"'To die, to sleep; to sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub;
for in that sleep of death what dreams may come when we have shuffled
off this mortal coil, must give us pause.'"


There was more to that speech, of course, but that was all the
teacher, whose name was Mary Pratt, required us to memorize. Why
overdo? It was certainly enough for the occasion, raising as it did
the specter of having yet another Vietnam veteran on the faculty
killing himself on school property.

I fished the key to the bell tower from my pocket and threw it into
the middle of the circular table. The table was so big that somebody
was going to have to climb up on it to retrieve the key, or maybe find
a long stick somewhere.

"Good luck with the bells," I said. I was out of there.


I departed Samoza Hall by the same route Tex Johnson had taken. I sat
down on a bench at the edge of the Quadrangle, across from the
library, next to the Senior Walk. It was nice to be outside.

Damon Stem, my best friend on the faculty, happened by and asked me
what I was doing there.

I said I was sunning myself. I wouldn't tell anybody I had been fired
until I found myself sitting at the bar of the Black Cat Cafe. So
Professor Stem felt free to talk cheerful nonsense. He owned a
unicycle, and he could ride it, and he said he was considering riding
it in the academic procession to the graduation ceremonies, which were
then only about an hour in the future.

"I'm sure there are strong arguments on both sides," I said.

He had grown up in Shelby, Wisconsin, where practically everybody,
including grandmothers, could ride a unicycle. The thing was, a circus
had gone broke while playing Shelby 60 years earlier and had abandoned
a lot of its equipment, including several unicycles. So more and more
people there learned how to ride them, and ordered more unicycles for
themselves and their families. So Shelby became and remains today, so
far as I know, the Unicycling Capital of the World.

"Do it!" I said.


"You've convinced me," he said. He was happy. He was gone, and my
thoughts rode the breeze and the sunbeams back to when I was still in
uniform, but home from the war, and was offered ajob at Tarkington.
That happened in a Chinese restaurant on Harvard Square in Cambridge,
Massachusetts, where I was dining with my mother-in-law and my wife,
both of them still sane, and my two legitimate children, Melanie, 11,
and Eugene, Jr., 8. My illegitimate son, Rob Roy, conceived in Manila
only 2 weeks before, must have been the size of a BB shot.

I had been ordered to Cambridge in order to take an examination for
admission as a graduate student to the Physics Department of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. I was to earn a Master's
Degree, and then return to West Point as a teacher, but still a
soldier, a soldier to the end.

My family, except for the BB, was awaiting me at the

Chinese restaurant while I walked there in full uniform, ribbons and
all. My hair was cut short on top and shaved down to the skin on the
sides and back. People looked at me as though I were a freak. I might
as well have been wearing nothing but a black garterbelt.

That was how ridiculous men in uniform had become in academic
communities, even though a major part of Harvard's and MIT's income
came from research and development having to do with new weaponry. I
would have been dead if it weren't for that great gift to civilization
from the Chemistry Department of Harvard, which was napalm, or sticky
jellied gasoline.


It was near the end of the humiliating walk that somebody said to
somebody else behind me, "My goodness! Is it Halloween?"

I did not respond to that insult, did not give some draft-dodging
student burst eardrums and a collapsed windpipe to think about. I kept
on going because my mind was swamped with much deeper reasons for
unhappiness. My wife had moved herself and the kids from Fort Bragg to
Baltimore, where she was going to study Physical Therapy at Johns
Hopkins University. Her recently widowed mother had moved in with
them. Margaret and Mildred had bought a house in Baltimore with money
left to them by my father-in-law. It was their house, not mine. I
didn't know anybody in Baltimore.

What the heck was I supposed to do in Baltimore? It was exactly as
though I had been killed in Vietnam, and now Margaret had to make a
new life for herself. And I was a freak to my own children. They, too,
looked at me as though I were wearing nothing but a black garter-belt.

And wouldn't my wife and kids be proud of me when

I told them that I hadn't been able to answer more than a quarter of
the questions on the examination for admission to graduate studies in
Physics at MIT?

Welcome home!

As I was about to go into the Chinese restaurant, two pretty girls
came out. They, too, showed contempt for me and my haircut and my
uniform. So I said to them, "What's the matter? Haven't you ever
before seen a man wearing nothing but a black garterbelt?"


Black garterbelts were on my mind, I suppose, because I missed Jack
Patton so much. I had survived the war, but he hadn't, and the present
he sent me only a few days before he was shot dead, as I said before,
was a skin magazine called Black Garterbelt.

So there we were in that restaurant, with me on my third Sweet Rob
Roy. Margaret and her mother, again acting as though I were 6 feet
under in Arlington National Cemetery, did all the ordering. They had
it served family style. Nobody asked me how I had done on the exam.
Nobody asked me what it was like to be home from the war.

The others gabbled on to each other about all the tourist sights they
had seen that day. They hadn't come along to keep me company and give
me moral support. They were there to see "Old Ironsides" and the
belfry where Paul Revere had waved the lantern, signaling that the
British were coming by land, and so on.

Yes, and, speaking of belfries, it was on this same enchanted evening
that I was told that my wife, the mother of my children, had a
remarkable number of ancestors and collateral relatives with bats in
their belfries on her mother's side. This was news to me, and to

Margaret, too. We knew that Mildred had grown up in Peru, Indiana. But
all she had ever said about Peru was that Cole Porter had been born
there, too, and that she had been very glad to get out of there.

Mildred had let us know that her childhood had been unhappy, but that
was a long way from saying that she, which meant my wife and kids,
too, was from a notorious family of loonies there.


It turned out that my mother-in-law had run into an old friend from
her hometown, Peru, Indiana, during the tour of "Old Ironsides." Now
the old friend and his wife were at the table next to ours. When I
went to urinate, the old friend came with me, and told me what a hard
life Mildred had had in high school, with both her mother and her
mother's mother in the State Hospital for the Insane down in
Indianapolis.

"Her mother's brother, who she loved so much," he went on, shaking the
last droplets from the end of his weenie, "also went nuts in her
senior year, and set fires all over town. If I was her, I would have
taken off like a scalded cat for Wyoming, too."

As I say, this was news to me.

"Funny thing¡X" he went on, "it never seemed to hit any of them until
they were middle-aged."

"If I'm not laughing," I said, "that's because I got out on the wrong
side of the bed today."


No sooner had I returned to our table than a young man passing behind
me could not resist the impulse to touch my bristly haircut. I went
absolutely ape-poop! He was slight, and had long hair, and wore a
peace symbol around his neck. He looked like the singer Bob Dylan. For
all I know or care, he may actually have been Bob Dylan. Whoever he
was, I knocked him into a waiter carrying a heavily loaded tray.

Chinese food flew everywhere!

Pandemonium!


I ran outside. Everybody and everything was my enemy. I was back in
Vietnam!

But a Christ-like figure loomed before me. He was wearing a suit and
tie, but he had a long beard, and his eyes were full of love and pity.
He seemed to know all about me, and he really did. He was Sam
Wakefield, who had resigned his commission as a General, and gone over
to the Peace Movement, and become President of Tarkington College.

He said to me what he had said to me so long ago in Cleveland, at the
Science Fair: "What's the hurry, Son?"


21

Remembering my homecoming from Vietnam always puts me in mind of Bruce
Bergeron, a student of mine at Tarkington. I have already mentioned
Bruce. He joined the Ice Capades as a chorus boy after winning his
Associate in the Arts and Sciences Degree, and was murdered in
Dubuque. His father was President of the Wildlife Rescue Federation.

When I had Bruce in Music Appreciation I played a recording of
Tchaikovsky's 1812 Overture. I explained to the class that the
composition was about an actual event in history, the defeat of
Napoleon in Russia. I asked the students to think of some major event
in their own lives, and to imagine what kind of music might best
describe it. They were to think about it for a week before telling
anybody about the event or the music. I wanted their brains to cook
and cook with music, with the lid on tight.

The event Bruce Bergeron set to music in his head was getting stuck
between floors in an elevator when he was maybe 6 years old, on the
way with a Haitian nanny to a post-Christmas white sale at
Bloomingdale's department store in New York City. They were supposed
to be going to the American Museum of Natural History, but the nanny,
without permission from her employers, wanted to send some bargain
bedding to relatives in Haiti first.

The elevator got stuck right below the floor where the white sale was
going on. It was an automatic elevator. There was no operator. It was
jammed. When it became obvious that the elevator was going to stay
there, somebody pushed the alarm button, which the passengers could
hear clanging far below. According to Bruce, this was the first time
in his life that he had ever been in some kind of trouble that
grownups couldn't take care of at once.


There was a 2-way speaker in the elevator, and a woman's voice came
on, telling the people to stay calm. Bruce remembered that she made
this particular point:

Nobody was to try to climb out through the trapdoor in the ceiling. If
anybody did that, Bloomingdale's could not be responsible for whatever
might happen to him or her afterward.

Time went by. More time went by. To little Bruce it seemed that they
had been trapped there for a century. It was probably more like 20
minutes.

Little Bruce believed himself to be at the center of a major event in
American history. He imagined that not only his parents but the
President of the United States must be hearing about it on television.
When they were rescued, he thought, bands and cheering crowds would
greet him.

Little Bruce expected a banquet and a medal for not panicking, and for
not saying he had to go to the bathroom.


The elevator suddenly jolted upward a few centimeters, stopped. It
jolted upward a meter, an aftershock. The doors slithered open,
revealing the white sale in progress behind ordinary customers, who
were simply waiting for the next elevator, without any idea that there
had been something wrong with that one.

They wanted the people in there to get out so that they could get in.

There wasn't even somebody from the management of the store to offer
an anxious apology, to make certain that everybody was all right. All
the actions relative to freeing the captives had taken place far
away¡Xwherever the machinery was, wherever the alarm gong was,
wherever the woman was who had told them not to panic or climb out the
trapdoor.

That was that.


The nanny bought some bedding, and then she and little Bruce went on
to the American Museum of Natural History. The nanny made him promise
not to tell his parents that they had been to Bloomingdale's, too¡Xand
he never did.

He still hadn't told them when he spilled the beans in Music
Appreciation.

"You know what you have described to perfection?" I asked him.

"No," he said.

I said, "What it was like to come home from the Vietnam War."

22

I read about World War II. Civilians and soldiers alike, and even
little children, were proud to have played a part in it. It was
impossible, seemingly, for any sort of person not to feel a part of
that war, if he or she was alive while it was going on. Yes, and the
suffering or death of soldiers and sailors and Marines was felt at
least a little bit by everyone.

But the Vietnam War belongs exclusively to those of us who fought in
it. Nobody else had anything to do with it, supposedly. Everybody else
is as pure as the driven snow. We alone are stupid and dirty, having
fought such a war. When we lost, it served us right for ever having
started it. The night I went temporarily insane in a Chinese
restaurant on Harvard Square, everybody was a big success but me.


Before I blew up, Mildred's old friend from Peru, Indiana, spoke as
though we were in separate businesses, as though I were a podiatrist,
maybe, or a sheetmetal contractor, instead of somebody who had risked
his life and sacrificed common sense and decency on his behalf.

As it happened, he himself was in the medical-waste disposal game in
Indianapolis. That's a nice business to learn about in a Chinese
restaurant, with everybody dangling who knows what from chopsticks.

He said that his workaday problems had as much to do with aesthetics
as with toxicity. Those were both his words, "aesthetics" and
"toxicity."

He said, "Nobody likes to find a foot or a finger or whatever in a
garbage can or a dump, even though it is no more dangerous to public
health than the remains of a rib roast."

He asked me if I saw anything on his and his wife's table that I would
like to sample, that they had ordered too much.

"No, thank you, sir," I said.

"But telling you that," he said, "is coals to Newcastle."

"How so?" I said. I was trying not to listen to him, and was looking
in exactly the wrong place for distraction, which was the face of my
mother-in-law. Apparently this potential lunatic with no place else to
go had become a permanent part of our household. It was a fait
accompli.

"Well¡Xyou've been in war," he said. The way he said it, it was clear
that he considered the war to have been my war alone. "I mean you
people must have had to do a certain amount of cleaning up."

That was when the kid patted my bristles. My brains blew up like a
canteen of nitroglycerin.


My lawyer, much encouraged by the 2 lists I am making, and by the fact
that I have never masturbated and like to clean house, asked me
yesterday why it was that I never swore. He found me washing windows
in this library, although nobody had ordered me to do that.

So I told him my maternal grandfather's idea that obscenity and
blasphemy gave most people permission not to listen respectfully to
whatever was being said.

I repeated an old story Grandfather Wills had taught me, which was
about a town where a cannon was fired at noon every day. One day the
cannoneer was sick at the last minute and was too incapacitated to
fire the cannon.

So at high noon there was silence.

All the people in the town jumped out of their skins when the sun
reached its zenith. They asked each other in astonishment, "Good
gravy! What was that?"

My lawyer wanted to know what that had to do with my not swearing.

I replied that in an era as foulmouthed as this one, "Good gravy" had
the same power to startle as a cannon shot.


There on Harvard Square, back in 1975, Sam Wakefield again made
himself the helmsman of my destiny. He told me to stay out on the
sidewalk, where I felt safe. I was shaking like a leaf. I wanted to
bark like a dog.

He went into the restaurant, and somehow calmed everybody down, and
offered to pay for all damages from his own pocket right then and
there. He had a very rich wife, Andrea, who would become Tarkington's
Dean of Women after he committed suicide. Andrea died 2 years before
the prison break, and so is not buried with so many others next to the
stable, in the shadow of Musket Mountain when the Sun goes down.

She is buried next to her husband in Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania. The
glacier could still shove the 2 of them into West Virginia or
Maryland. Bon Voyage!


Andrea Wakefield was the 2nd person I spoke to after Tarkington fired
me. Damon Stern was the first. I am talking about 1991 again.
Practically everybody else was eating lobsters. Andrea came up to me
after meeting Stern farther down on the Senior Walk.

"I thought you would be in the Pavilion eating lobster," she said.

"Not hungry," I said.

"I can't stand it that they're boiled alive," she said. "You know what
Damon Stern just told me?"

"I'm sure it was interesting," I said.

"During the reign of Henry the 8th of England," she said,
"counterfeiters were boiled alive."

"Show biz," I said. "Were they boiled alive in pub-


"He didn't say," she said. "And what are you doing here?"

"Enjoying the sunshine," I said.

She believed me. She sat down next to me. She was already wearing her
academic gown for the faculty parade to graduation. Her cowl
identified her as a graduate of the Sorbonne in Paris, France. In
addition to her duties as Dean, dealing with unwanted pregnancies and
drug addiction and the like, she also taught French and Italian and
oil painting. She was from a genuinely distinguished old Philadelphia
family, which had given civilization a remarkable number of educators
and lawyers and physicians and artists. She actually may have been
what Jason Wilder and several of Tarkington's Trustees believed
themselves to be, obviously the most highly evolved creatures on the
planet.

She was a lot smarter than her husband.

I always meant to ask her how a Quaker came to marry a professional
soldier, but I never did.

Too late now.


Even at her age then, which was about 60, 10 years older than me,
Andrea was the best figure skater on the faculty. I think figure
skating, if Andrea Wakefield could find the right partner, was
eroticism enough for her. General Wakefield couldn't skate for sour
apples. The best partner she had on ice at Tarkington, probably, was
Bruce Bergeron¡Xthe boy who was trapped in an elevator at
Bloomingdale's, who became the youth who couldn't get into any college
but Tarkington, who became the man who joined the chorus of an ice
show and then was murdered by somebody who presumably hated
homosexuals, or loved one too much.

Andrea and I had never been lovers. She was too contented and old for
me.


"I want you to know I think you're a Saint," said Andrea.

"How so?" I said.

"You're so nice to your wife and mother-in-law."

"It's easier than what I did for Presidents and Generals and Henry
Kissinger," I said.

"But this is voluntary," she said.

"So was that," I said. "I was real gung-ho."


"When you realize how many men nowadays dissolve their marriages when
they become the least little bit inconvenient or uncomfortable," she
said, "all I can think is that you're a Saint."

"They didn't want to come up here, you know," I said. "They were very
happy in Baltimore, and Margaret would have become a physical
therapist."

"It isn't this valley that made them sick, is it?" she said. "It isn't
this valley that made my husband sick."

"It's a clock that made them sick," I said. "It would have struck
midnight for both of them, no matter where they were."

"That's how I feel about Sam," she said. "I can't feel guilty."

"Shouldn't," I said.

"When he resigned from the Army and went over to the peace movement,"
she said, "I think he was trying to stop the clock. Didn't work."

"I miss him," I said.

"Don't let the war kill you, too," she said.

"Don't worry," I said.


"You still haven't found the money?" she said. She was talking about
the money Mildred had gotten for the house in Baltimore. While Mildred
was still fairly sane, she deposited it in the Scipio branch of the
First National Bank of Rochester. But then she withdrew it in cash
when the bank was bought by the Sultan of Brunei, without telling me
or Margaret that she had done so. Then she hid it somewhere, but she
couldn't remember where.

"I don't even think about it anymore," I said. "The most likely thing
is that somebody else found it. It could have been a bunch of kids. It
could have been somebody

? working on the house. Whoever it was sure isn't going to say so."

We were talking about $45,000 and change.

"I know I should give a darn, but somehow I can't give a darn," I
said.

"The war did that to you," she said.

"Who knows?" I said.


As we chatted in the sunshine, a powerful motorcycle came to life with
a roar in the valley, in the region of the Black Cat Cafe. Then
another one spoke, and yet another.

"Hell's Angels?" she said. "You mean it's really going to happen?"

The joke was that Tex Johnson, the College President, having seen one
too many motorcycle movies, believed that the campus might actually be
assaulted by Hell's Angels someday. This fantasy was so real to him
that he had bought an Israeli sniper's rifle, complete with a
telescopic sight, and ammunition for it from a drugstore in Portland,
Oregon. He and Zuzu were visiting Zuzu's half sister. That was the
same weapon which would eventually get him crucified.

But now Tex's anticipation of an assault by Hell's Angels didn't seem
so comical after all. A mighty doomsday chorus of basso profundo
2-wheelers was growing louder and louder and coming closer and closer.
There could be no doubt about it! Whoever it was, whatever it was, its
destination could only be Tarkington!

23

It wasn't Hell's Angels.

It wasn't lower-class people of any kind.

It was a motorcade of highly successful Americans, most on
motorcycles, but some in limousines, led by Arthur Clarke, the
fun-loving billionaire. He himself was on a motorcycle, and on the
saddle behind him, holding on for dear life, her skirt hiked up to her
crotch, was Gloria White, the 60-year-old lifelong movie star!

Bringing up the rear were a sound truck and a flatbed carrying a
deflated hot-air balloon. When the balloon was inflated at the center
of the Quadrangle it would turn out to be shaped like a castle Clarke
owned in Ireland!


Cough, cough. Silence. Two more: Cough, cough. There, I'm OK now.
Cough. That's it. I really am OK now. Peace.


This wasn't Arthur C. Clarke, the science fiction writer who wrote all
the books about humanity's destiny in other parts of the Universe.
This was Arthur K. Clarke, the billionaire speculator and publisher of
magazines and books about high finance.


Cough. I beg your pardon. A little blood this time. In the immortal
words of the Bard of Avon:

"Out, damned spot! out, I say! One; two: why, then, 'tis time to do't.
Hell is murky! Fie, my lord, fle! a soldier, and afeard? What need we
fear who knows it, when none can call our power to account? Who would
have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him?"

Amen. And especial thanks to Bartlett's Familiar Quotations.


I read a lot of science fiction when I was in the Army, including
Arthur C. Clarke's Childhood's End, which I thought was a masterpiece.
He was best known for the movie 2001, the very year in which I am
writing and coughing now.

I saw 2001 twice in Vietnam. I remember 2 wounded soldiers in
wheelchairs in the front row at 1 of those showings. The whole front
row was wheelchairs. The 2 soldiers had had their feet wrecked some
way, but seemed to be OK from the knees on up, and they weren't in any
pain. They were awaiting transportation back to the States, I guess,
where they could be fitted with prostheses. I don't think either of
them was older than 18. One was black and 1 was white.

After the lights went up, I heard the black one say to the white one,
"You tell me: What was that all about?"

The white one said, "I dunno, I dunno. I'll be happy if I can just get
back to Cairo, Illinois."

He didn't pronounce it "ky-roe." He pronounced it "kay-roe."

My mother-in-law from Peru, Indiana, pronounces the name of her
hometown "pee-roo," not "puh-roo."

Old Mildred pronounces the name of another Indiana town, Brazil, as
"brazzle."


Arthur K. Clarke was coming to Tarkington to get an honorary Grand
Contributor to the Arts and Sciences Degree.

The College was prevented by law from awarding any sort of degree
which sounded as though the recipient had done serious work to get it.
Paul Slazinger, the former Writer in Residence, I remember, objected
to real institutions of higher learning giving honorary degrees with
the word "Doctor" in them anywhere. He wanted them to use "Panjandrum"
instead.

When the Vietnam War was going on, though, a kid could stay out of it
by enrolling at Tarkington. As far as Draft Boards were concerned,
Tarkington was as real a college as MIT. This could have been
politics.

It must have been politics.


Everybody knew Arthur Clarke was going to get a meaningless
certificate. But only Tex Johnson and the campus cops and the Provost
had advance warning of the spectacular entrance he planned to make. It
was a regular military operation. The motorcycles, and there were
about 30 of them, and the balloon had been trucked into the parking
lot behind the Black Cat Cafe at dawn.

And then Clarke and Gloria White and the rest of them, including Henry
Kissinger, had been brought down from the Rochester airport in
limousines, fol lowed by the sound truck. Kissinger wouldn't ride a
motorcycle. Neither would some others, who came all the way to the
Quadrangle by limousine.

Just like the people on the motorcycles, though, the people in the
limousines wore gold crash helmets decorated with dollar signs.


It's a good thing Tex Johnson knew Clarke was coming by motorcycle, or
Tex just might have shot him with the Israeli rifle he had bought in
Oregon.


Clarke's big arrival wasn't a half-bad dress rehearsal for Judgment
Day. St. John the Divine in the Bible could only imagine such an
absolutely knockout show with noise and smoke and gold and lions and
eagles and thrones and celebrities and marvels up in the sky and so
on. But Arthur K. Clarke had created a real one with modern technology
and tons of cash!

The gold-helmeted motorcyclists formed a hollow square on the
Quadrangle, facing outward, making their mighty steeds roar and roar.

Workmen in white coveralls began to inflate the balloon.

The sound truck ripped the air to shreds with the recorded racket of a
bagpipe band.

Arthur Clarke, astride his bike, was looking in my direction. That was
because great pals of his on the Board of Trustees were waving to him
from the building right behind me. I found myself deeply offended by
his proof that big money could buy big happiness.

I yawned elaborately. I turned my back on him and his show. I walked
away as though I had much better things to do than gape at an
imbecile.

Thus did I miss seeing the balloon snap its cable and, as unattached
as myself, sail over the prison across the lake.


All the prisoners over there could see of the outside world was sky.
Some of them in the exercise yard saw a castle up there for just a
moment. What on Earth could the explanation be?


"There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, than are dreamt
of in your philosophy."¡XBartlett's Familiar Quotations


That empty castle with its mooring snapped, a plaything of the wind,
was a lot like me. We were so much alike, in fact, that I myself would
pay a surprise visit to the prison before the Sun went down.

If the balloon had been as close to the ground as I was, it would have
been blown this way and that at first, before it gained sufficient
altitude for the prevailing wind to take it across the lake. What
caused me to change course, however, wasn't random gusts but the
possibility of running into this person or that one who had the power
to make me even more uncomfortable. I particularly did not want to run
into Zuzu Johnson or the departing Artist in Residence, Pamela Ford
Hall.

But life being what it was, I would of course run into both of them.


I would rather have faced Zuzu than Pamela, since Pamela had gone all
to pieces and Zuzu hadn't. But as I say, I would have to face them
both.

I wasn't what had shoved Pamela over the edge. It was her 1-woman show
in Buffalo a couple of months earlier. What went wrong with it seemed
funny to everybody but her, and it was in the papers and on TV. For a
couple of days she was the light side of the news, comic relief from
reports of the rapid growth of glaciers at the poles and the desert
where the Amazon rain forest used to be. And I am sure there was
another oil spill. There was always another oil spill.

If Denver and Santa Fe and Le Havre, France, hadn't been evacuated yet
because of atomic wastes in their water supplies, they soon would be.


What happened to Pamela's 1-woman show also gave a lot of people an
opportunity to jeer at modern art, which only rich people claimed to
like.

As I've said, Pamela worked in polyurethane, which is easy to carve
and weighs almost nothing, and smells like urine when it's hot. Her
figures, moreover, were small, women in full skirts, sitting and
hunched over so you couldn't see their faces. A shoebox could have
contained any 1 of them.

So they were displayed on pedestals in Buffalo, but they weren't glued
down. Wind was not considered a problem, since there were 3 sets of
doors between her stuff and the main entrance to the museum, which
faced Lake Erie.


The museum, the Hanson Centre for the Arts, was brand-new, a gift to
the city from a Rockefeller heir living in Buffalo who had come into a
great deal of money from the sale of Rockefeller Center in Manhattan
to the Japanese. This was an old lady in a wheelchair. She hadn't
stepped on a mine in Vietnam. I think it was just old age that knocked
the pins out from under her, and all the waiting for Rockefeller
properties to be sold off so she could have some dough for a change.


The press was there because this was the Centre's grand opening.
Pamela Ford Hall's first 1-woman show, which she called "Bagladies,"
was incidental, except that it was mounted in the gallery, where a
string quartet was playing and champagne and canapes were being
served. This was black-tie.

The donor, Miss Hanson, was the last to arrive. She and her wheelchair
were set down on the top step outside. Then all 3 sets of doors
between Pam's bagladies and the North Pole were thrown open wide. So
all the bagladies were blown off their pedestals. They wound up on the
floor, piled up against the hollow baseboards which concealed hot
heating pipes.

TV cameras caught everything but the smell of hot polyurethane. What a
relief from mundane worries! Who says the news has to be nothing but
grim day after day?

   

24

Pamela was sulking next to the stable. The stable wasn't in the shadow
of Musket Mountain yet. It would be another 7 hours before the Sun
went down.

This was years before the prison break, but there were already 2
bodies and I human head buried out that way. Everybody knew about the
2 bodies, which had been interred with honors and topped with a
tombstone. The head would come as a complete surprise when more graves
were dug with a backhoe at the end of the prison break.

Whose head was it?


The 2 bodies everybody knew about belonged to Tarkington's first
teacher of Botany and German and the flute, the brewmaster Hermann
Shultz and his wife Sophia. They died within 1 day of each other
during a diphtheria epidemic in 1893. They were in fairly fresh graves
the day I was fired, although their joint grave marker was 98 years
old. Their bodies and tombstone were moved there to make room for the
Pahiavi Pavilion.

The mortician from down in town who took charge of moving the bodies
back in 1987 reported that they were remarkably well preserved. He
invited me to look, but I told him I was willing to take his word for
it.


Can you imagine that? After all the corpses I saw in Vietnam, and in
many cases created, I was squeamish about looking at 2 more which had
absolutely nothing to do with me. I am at a loss for an explanation.
Maybe I was thinking like an innocent little boy again.

I have leafed through the Atheist's Bible, Bartlett's Familiar
Quotations, for some sort of comment on unexpected squeamishness. The
best I can do is something Lady Macbeth said to her henpecked husband:

"Fie! a soldier, and afeard?"


Speaking of Atheism, I remember one time when Jack Patton and I went
to a sermon in Vietnam delivered by the highest-ranking Chaplain in
the Army. He was a General.

The sermon was based on what he claimed was a well-known fact, that
there were no Atheists in foxholes.

I asked Jack what he thought of the sermon afterward, and he said,
"There's a Chaplain who never visited the front."


The mortician, who is himself now in a covered trench by the stable,
was Norman Updike, a descendant of the valley's early Dutch settlers.
He went on to tell me with bow-wow cheerfulness back in 1987 that
people were generally mistaken about how quickly things rot, turn into
good old dirt or fertilizer or dust or whatever. He said scientists
had discovered well-preserved meat and vegetables deep in city dumps,
thrown away presumably years and years ago. Like Hermann and Sophia
Shultz, these theoretically biodegradable works of Nature had failed
to rot for want of moisture, which was life itself to worms and fungi
and bacteria.

"Even without modern embalming techniques," he said, "ashes to ashes
and dust takes much, much longer than most people realize."

"I'm encouraged," I said.


I did not see Pamela Ford Hall by the stable until it was too late for
me to head off in the opposite direction.

I was distracted from watching out for her and Zuzu by a parent who
had fled the bagpipe music on the Quadrangle. He commented that I
seemed very depressed about something.

I still hadn't told anybody I had been fired, and I certainly didn't
want to share the news with a stranger. So I said I couldn't help
being unhappy about the ice caps and the deserts and the busted
economy and the race riots and so on.

He told me to cheer up, that 1,000,000,000 Chinese were about to throw
off the yoke of Communism. After they did that, he said, they would
all want automobiles and tires and gasoline and so forth.

I pointed out that virtually all American industries having to do with
automobiles either were owned or had been run out of business by the
Japanese.

"And what is to prevent you from doing what I've done?" he said. "It's
a free country." He said that his entire portfolio consisted of stocks
in Japanese corporations.

Can you imagine what 1,000,000,000 Chinese in au tomobiles would do to
each other and what's left of the atmosphere?


I was so intent on getting away from that typical Ruling Class
chowderhead that I did not see Pamela until I was right next to her.
She was sitting on the ground drinking blackberry brandy, with her
back to the Shultzes' tombstone. She was gazing up at Musket Mountain.
She had a serious alcohol problem. I didn't blame myself for that. The
worst problem in the life of any alcoholic is alcohol.

The inscription on the grave marker was facing me.

The diphtheria epidemic that killed so many people in this valley took
place when almost all of Tarkington's students were away on vacation.

That was certainly lucky for the students. If school had been in
session during the epidemic, many, many of them might have wound up
with the Shultzes, first where the Pavilion now stands, and then next
to the

HERMANN SHULTZ


1830¡X1893

SOPHIA

HIMMLER SHULTZ

1841¡X1893

FREETHINKERS

stable, in the shadow of Musket Mountain when the Sun goes down.

And then the student body got lucky again 2 years ago. They were all
away on a recess between semesters when habitual criminals overran
this insignificant little country town.


Miracles.


I have looked up who the Freethinkers were. They were members of a
short-lived sect, mostly of German descent, who believed, as did my
Grandfather Wills, that nothing but sleep awaited good and evil
persons alike in the Afterlife, that science had proved all organized
religions to be baloney, that God was unknowable, and that the
greatest use a person could make of his or her lifetime was to improve
the quality of life for all in his or her community.


Hermann and Sophia Shultz weren't the only victims of the diphtheria
epidemic. Far from it! But they were the only ones who asked to be
buried on the campus, which they said on their deathbeds was holy
ground to them.


Pamela wasn't surprised to see me. She was insulated against surprises
by alcohol. The first thing she said to me was, "No." I hadn't said
anything yet. She thought I had come to make love to her. I could
understand why she might think that.

I myself had started thinking that.

And then she said, "This has certainly been the best year of my life,
and I want to thank you for being such a big part of it." This was
irony. She was being corrosively insincere.

"When are you leaving?" I said.

"Never," she said. "My transmission is shot." She was talking about
her 12-year-old Buick 4-door sedan, which she had gotten as part of
her divorce settlement from her ex-husband. He used to mock her
efforts to become a serious artist, even slapping or kicking her from
time to time. So he must have laughed even harder than everybody else
when her 1-woman show was blown off its pedestals in Buffalo.

She said a new transmission was going to cost $850 down in town, and
that the mechanic wanted to be paid in Yen, and that he hinted that
the repairs would cost a lot less if she would go to bed with him. "I
don't suppose you ever found out where your mother-in-law hid the
money," she said.

"No," I said.

"Maybe I should go looking for it," she said.

"I'm sure somebody else found it, and just isn't saying anything," I
said.

"I never asked you to pay for anything before," she said. "How about
you buy me a new transmission? Then, when anybody asks me, 'Where did
you get that beautiful transmission?' I can answer, 'An old lover gave
that to me. He is a very famous war hero, but I am not free to reveal
his name.'"

"Who is the mechanic?" I asked.

"The Prince of Wales," she said. "If I go to bed with him, he will not
only fix my transmission, he will make me the Queen of England. You
never made me Queen of England."

"Was it Whitey VanArsdale?" I said. This was a mechanic down in town
who used to tell everybody that he or she had a broken transmission.
He did it to me with the car I had before the Mercedes, which was a
1979 Chevy station wagon. I got a second opinion, from a student,
actually. The transmission was fine. All I'd wanted in the first place
was a grease job. Whitey VanArsdale, too, is now buried next to the
stable. He ambushed some convicts and got ambushed right back. His
victory lasted 10 minutes, if that. It was, "Bang," and then, a few
minutes later, "Bang, bang," right back.


Pamela, sitting on the ground with her back to the tombstone, didn't
do to me what Zuzu Johnson would soon do to me, which was to identify
me as a major cause of her unhappiness. The closest Pam came to doing
that, I guess, was when she said I had never made her the Queen of
England. Zuzu's complaint would be that I had never seriously intended
to make her my wife, despite all our talk in bed about our running off
to Venice, which neither one of us had ever seen. She would open a
flower shop there, I promised her, since she was so good at gardening.
I would teach English as a second language or help local glassblowers
get their wares into American department stores, and so on.

Zuzu was also a pretty good photographer, so I said she would soon be
hanging around where the gondolas took on passengers, and selling
tourists Polaroid pictures of themselves in gondolas right then and
there.

When it came to dreaming up a future for ourselves, we left GRIOTTM in
the dust.


I considered those dreams of Venice part of lovemaking, my erotic
analogue to Zuzu's perfume. But Zuzu took them seriously. She was all
set to go. And I couldn't go because of my family responsibilities.

Pamela knew about my love affair with Zuzu, and all the hocus pocus
about Venice. Zuzu told her.

"You know what you ought to say to any woman dumb enough to fall in
love with you?" she asked me. Her gaze was on Musket Mountain, not on
me.

"No," I said.

And she said, "'Welcome to Vietnam.'"


She was sitting over the Shultzes in their caskets. I was standing
over a severed head which would be dug up by a backhoe in 8 years. The
head had been in the ground so long that it was just a skull.

A specialist in Forensic Medicine from the State Police happened to be
down here when the skull showed up in the backhoe's scoop, so he had a
look at it, told us what he thought. He didn't think it was an Indian,
which was my first guess. He said it had belonged to a white woman
maybe 20 years old. She hadn't been bludgeoned or shot in the head, so
he would have to see the rest of the skeleton before theorizing about
what might have killed her.

But the backhoe never brought up another bone.

Decapitation, alone, of course, could have done the job.

He wasn't much interested. He judged from the patina on the skull that
its owner had died long before we were born. He was here to examine
the bodies of people who had been killed after the prison break, and
to make educated guesses about how they had died, by gunshot or
whatever.

He was especially fascinated by Tex Johnson's body. He had seen almost
everything in his line of work, he told me, but never a man who had
been crucified, with spikes through the palms and feet and all.


I wanted him to talk more about the skull, but he changed the subject
right back to crucifixion. He sure knew a lot about it.

He told me one thing I'd never realized: that the Jews, not just the
Romans, also crucified their idea of criminals from time to time. Live
and learn!

How come I'd never heard that?


Darius, King of Persia, he told me, crucified 3,000 people he thought
were enemies in Babylon. After the Romans put down the slave revolt
led by Spartacus, he said, they crucified 6,000 of the rebels on
either side of the Appian Way!

He said that the crucifixion of Tex Johnson was unconventional in
several ways besides Tex's being dead or nearly dead when they spiked
him to timbers in the stable loft. He hadn't been whipped. There
hadn't been a cross-beam for him to carry to his place of execution.
There was no sign over his head saying what his crime was. And there
was no spike in the upright, whose head would abrade his crotch and
hindquarters as he turned this way and that in efforts to become more
comfortable.

As I said at the beginning of this book, if I had been a professional
soldier back then, I probably would have crucified people without
thinking much about it, if ordered to do so.

Or I would have ordered underlings to do it, and told them how to do
it, if I had been a high-ranking officer.

I might have taught recruits who had never had anything to do with
crucifixions, who maybe had never even seen one before, a new word
from the vocabulary of military science of that time. The word was
crurifragium. I myself learned it from the Medical Examiner, and I
found it so interesting that I went and got a pencil and wrote it
down.

It is a Latin word for "breaking the legs of a crucified person with
an iron rod in order to shorten his time of suffering." But that still
didn't make crucifixion a country club.


What kind of an animal would do such a thing? The old me, I think.


The late unicyclist Professor Damon Stern asked me one time if I
thought there would be a market for religious figures of Christ riding
a unicycle instead of spiked to a cross. It was just a joke. He didn't
want an answer, and I didn't give him one. Some other subject must
have come up right away.

But I would tell him now, if he hadn't been killed while trying to
save the horses, that the most important message of a crucifix, to me
anyway, was how unspeakably cruel supposedly sane human beings can be
when under orders from a superior authority.


But listen to this: While idly winnowing through old local newspapers
here, I think I have discovered whom that probably Caucasian, surely
young and female skull belonged to. I want to rush out into the prison
yard, formerly the Quadrangle, shouting "Eureka! Eureka!"

My educated guess is that the skull belonged to Letitia Smiley, a
reputedly beautiful, dyslexic Tarkington senior who disappeared from
the campus in 1922, after winning the traditional Women's Barefoot
Race from the bell tower to the President's House and back again.
Letitia Smiley was crowned Lilac Queen as her prize, and she burst
into tears for reasons nobody could understand. Something obviously
was bothering her. People were agreed, I learn from a newspaper of the
time, that Letitia Smiley's tears were not happy tears.

One suspicion had to be, although nobody said so for publication, that
Miss Smiley was pregnant¡Xpossibly by a member of the student body or
faculty. I am playing detective now, with nothing but a skull and old
newspapers to go on. But at least I have what the police were unable
to find back then: what might be proof positive in the hands of a
forensic cranial expert that Letitia Smiley was no longer among the
living. The morning after she was crowned Lilac Queen, her bed was
found to contain a dummy made of rolled-up bath towels. A souvenir
football given to her by an admirer at Union College in Schenectady
was the dummy's head. On it was painted: "Union 31, Hobart 3."

After that: thin air.


A dentist would be no help in identifying the skull, since whoever
owned it never had so much as a single cavity to be filled. Whoever it
was had perfect teeth. Who is alive today who could tell us whether or
not Letitia Smiley, who herself would be 100 years old now, in the
year 2001, had perfect teeth?

That was how a lot of the more mutilated bodies of soldiers in Vietnam
were positively identified, by their imperfect teeth.

There is no statute of limitations on murder, the most terrible crime
of all, they say. But how old would her killer be by now? If he was
who I think he was, he would be 135. I think he was none other than
Kensington Barber, the Provost of Tarkington College at the time. He
would spend his last days in the State Hospital for the Insane up in
Batavia. I think it was he, empowered to make bed checks in both the
women's and the men's dormitories, who made the dummy whose head was a
football.

I think Letitia Smiley was dead by then.

And it was a matter of public record that it was the Provost who found
the dummy.


The medical examiner from the State Police said it was odd that there
was no hair still stuck to the skull. He thought it might have been
scalped or boiled before it was buried, to make it that much harder to
identify. And what have I discovered? That Letitia was famous in her
short life for her long golden hair. The newspaper description of the
race she won goes on and on about her golden hair.

Yes, and the same story gives Kensington Barber as the sole source of
the assertion that Letitia had been deeply troubled by a stormy
romance with a much older man down in Scipio. The Provost wished that
he or somebody knew the name of the man, so that the police could
question him.

In another story, Barber told a reporter that he had planned to take
his family to Europe that summer but would stay in Scipio instead, in
order to do all he could to clear up the mystery of what had become of
Letitia Smiley. Such dedication to duty!

He had a wife and 2 kids, and he sent them to Europe without him.
Since the campus was virtually deserted in the summertime, except for
the maintenance staff, which took orders from him, he could easily
have ensured his own privacy by sending the workmen to an-other part
of the campus while he buried small parts of Letitia, possibly using a
posthole digger.


I have to wonder, too, in light of my own experiences in
public-relations hocus pocus and the recent history of my Government,
if there weren't a lot of people back in 1922 who could put 2 and 2
together as easily as I have now. For the sake of the reputation of
what had become Scipio's principal business, the college, there could
have been a massive cover-up.

Kensington Barber would have a nervous breakdown at the end of the
summer, and be committed, as I've said, to Batavia. The President of
Tarkington at that time, who was Herbert Van Arsdale, no relation to
Whitey VanArsdale, the dishonest mechanic, ascribed the Provost's
crackup to exhaustion brought on by his tireless efforts to solve the
mystery of the disappearance of the golden-haired Lilac Queen.

25

My lawyer found only one thing really interesting in my theory about
the Lilac Queen, and that was about the broad purple hair ribbons worn
by all the girls in that footrace, right up to the last race before
the prison break. The escaped convicts discovered spools and spools of
that ribbon in a closet in the office of the Dean of Women. Alton
Darwin had them cut it up into armbands as a sort of uniform, a quick
way to tell friend from foe. Of course, skin color already did a
pretty good job of that.

The significance of the purple armbands, my lawyer says, is that I
never put one on. This would help to prove that I was truly neutral.


The convicts didn't create a new flag. They flew the Stars and Stripes
from the bell tower. Alton Darwin said they weren't against America.
He said, "We are America."

So 1 took my leave of Pamela Ford Hall on the afternoon Tarkington
fired me. I would never see her again. The only real favor I ever did
for her, I suppose, was to tell her to get a second opinion before
letting Whitey VanArsdale sell her a new transmission. She did that, I
heard, and it turned out that her old transmission was perfectly OK.

It and the rest of the car took her all the way down to Key West,
where the former Writer in Residence Paul Slazinger had settled in,
living well on his Genius Grant from the MacArthur Foundation. I
hadn't realized that he and she had been an item when they were both
at Tarkington, but I guess they were. She certainly never told me
about it. At any rate, when I was working over at Athena, I got an
announcement of their impending wedding down there, forwarded from
Scipio.

But evidently that fell through. I imagine her drinking and her
insistence on pursuing an art career, even though she wasn't talented,
frightened the old novelist.


Slazinger was no prize himself, of course.


After the prison break, I told the GR1OT~ here all I knew about
Pamela, and asked it to guess what might become of her after her
breakup with Paul Slazinger. GRIOT~ had her die of cirrhosis of the
liver. I gave the machine the same set of facts a second time, and it
had her freezing to death in a doorway in Chicago.

The prognosis was not good.


After leaving Pamela, whose basic problem wasn't me but alcohol, I
started to climb Musket Mountain, intending to think things out under
the water tower. But I was met by Zuzu Jackson, who was coming down.
She said she had been under the water tower for hours, trying to think
up dreams to replace those we had had of running off to Venice.

She said that maybe she would run off to Venice alone, and take
Polaroid pictures of tourists getting in and out of gondolas.

The prognosis for her was a lot better than for Pamela, short-term
anyway. At least she wasn't an addict, and at least she wasn't all
alone in the world, even if all she had was Tex. And at least she
hadn't been held up as an object of public ridicule from coast to
coast.

And she could see the humorous side of things. She said, I remember,
that the loss of the Venice dream had left her a walking corpse, but
that a zombie was an ideal mate for a College President.

She went on like that for a little while, but she didn't cry, and she
ran out of steam pretty quick. The last thing she said was that she
didn't blame me. "I take full responsibility," she said, speaking over
her shoulder as she walked away, "for falling in love with such an
obvious jerk."

Fair enough!


I decided not to climb Musket Mountain after all. I went home instead.
It would be wiser to think things out in my garage, where other loose
cannons from my past were unlikely to interrupt me. But when I got
there I found a man from United Parcel Service ringing the bell. I
didn't know him. He was new to town, or he wouldn't have asked why all
the blinds were drawn. Anybody who had been in Scipio any length of
time knew why the blinds were drawn.

Crazy people lived in there.

I told him somebody was sick in there, and asked what I could do for
him.

He said he had this big box for me from St. Louis, Missouri.


I said I didn't know anybody in St. Louis, Missouri, and wasn't
expecting a big box from anywhere. But he proved to me that it was
addressed to me all right, so I said, "OK, let's see it." It turned
out to be my old footlocker from Vietnam, which I had left behind when
the excrement hit the air-conditioning, when I was ordered to take
charge of the evacuation from the roof of the embassy.

Its arrival was not a complete surprise. Several months earlier I had
received a notice of its existence in a huge Army warehouse that was
indeed on the edge of St. Louis, where all sorts of unclaimed personal
property of soldiers was stored, stuff ditched on battlefields or
whatever. Some idiot must have put my footlocker on one of the last
American planes to flee Vietnam, thus depriving the enemy of my razor,
my toothbrush, my socks and underwear, and, as it happened, the late
Jack Patton's final birthday present to me, a copy of Black
Garterbelt. A mere 14 years later, the Army said they had it, and
asked me if I wanted it. I said, "Yes." A mere 2 years more went by,
and then, suddenly, here it was at my doorstep. Some glaciers move
faster than that.

So I had the UPS man help me lug it into the garage. It wasn't very
heavy. It was just unwieldy.

The Mercedes was parked out front. I hadn't noticed yet that kids from
the town had cored it again. All 4 tires were flat again.

Cough, cough.


The UPS man was really only a boy still. He was so childlike and new
to his job that he had to ask me what was inside the box.

"If the Vietnam War was still going on," I said, "it might have been
you in there." I meant he might have wound up in a casket.

"I don't get it," he said.

"Never mind," I said. I knocked off the lock and hasp with a hammer. I
lifted the lid of what was indeed a sort of casket to me. It contained
the remains of the soldier I used to be. On top of everything else,
lying flat and face up, was that copy of Black Garterbelt.

"Wow," said the kid. He was awed by the woman on the magazine cover.
He might have been an Astronaut on his first trip in space.

"Have you ever considered being a soldier?" I asked him. "I think
you'd make a good ohe."


I never saw him again. He could have been fired soon after that, and
gone looking for work elsewhere. He certainly wasn't going to last
long as a UPS man if he was going to hang around like a kid on
Christmas morning until he found out what was inside all the different
packages.


I stayed in the garage. I didn't want to go into the house. I didn't
want to go outdoors again, either. So I sat down on my footlocker and
read "The Protocols of the Elders of Tralfamadore" in Black
Garterbelt. It was about intelligent threads of energy trillions of
light-years long. They wanted mortal, self-reproducing life forms to
spread out through the Universe. So several of them, the Elders in the
title, held a meeting by intersecting near a planet called
Tralfamadore. The author never said why the Elders thought the spread
of life was such a hot idea. I don't blame him. I can't think of any
strong arguments in favor of it. To me, wanting every habitable planet
to be inhabited is like wanting everybody to have athlete's foot.

The Elders agreed at the meeting that the only practical way for life
to travel great distances through space was in the form of extremely
small and durable plants and animals hitching rides on meteors that
ricocheted off their planets.

But no germs tough enough to survive a trip like that had yet evolved
anywhere. Life was too easy for them. They were a bunch of creampuffs.
Any creature they infected, chemically speaking, was as challenging as
so much chicken soup.


There were people on Earth at the time of the meeting, but they were
just more hot slop for the germs to swim in. But they had extra-large
brains, and some of them could talk. A few could even read and write!
So the Elders focused in on them, and wondered if people's brains
might not invent survival tests for germs which were truly horrible.

They saw in us a potential for chemical evils on a cosmic scale. Nor
did we disappoint them.


What a story!


It so happened, according to this story, that the legend of Adam and
Eve was being written down for the first time. A woman was doing it.
Until then, that charming bunkum had been passed from generation to
generation by word of mouth.

The Elders let her write down most of the origin myth just the way she
had heard it, the way everybody told it, until she got very close to
the end. Then they took control of her brain and had her write down
something which had never been part of the myth before.

It was a speech by God to Adam and Eve, supposedly. This was it, and
life would become pure hell for microorganisms soon afterward: "Fill
the Earth and subdue it; and have dominion over the fish of the sea
and over the birds of the air and over every living thing that moves
on the Earth."


Cough.

   

26

So the people on Earth thought they had instructions from the Creator
of the Universe Himself tb wreck the joint. But they were going at it
too slowly to satisfy the Elders, so the Elders put it into the
people's heads that they themselves were the life forms that were
supposed to spread out through the Universe. This was a preposterous
idea, of course. In the words of the nameless author: "How could all
that meat, needing so much food and water and oxygen, and with bowel
movements so enormous, expect to survive a trip of any distance
whatsoever through the limitless void of outer space? It was a miracle
that such ravenous and cumbersome giants could make a roundtrip for a
6-pack to the nearest grocery store."

The Elders, incidentally, had given up on influencing the humanoids of
Tralfamadore, who were right below where they were meeting. The
Tralfamadorians had senses of humor and so knew themselves for the
severely limited lunkers, not to say crazy lunkers, they really were.
They were immune to the kilovolts of pride the

Elders jazzed their brains with. They laughed right away when the idea
popped up in their heads that they were the glory of the Universe, and
that they were supposed to colonize other planets with their
incomparable magnificence. They knew exactly how clumsy and dumb they
were, even though they could talk and some of them could read and
write and do math. One author wrote a series of side-splitting satires
about Tralfamadorians arriving on other planets with the intention of
spreading enlightenment.

But the people here on Earth, being humorless, found the same idea
quite acceptable.


It appeared to the Elders that the people here would believe anything
about themselves, no matter how preposterous, as long as it was
flattering. To make sure of this, they performed an experiment. They
put the idea into Earthlings' heads that the whole Universe had been
created by one big male animal who looked just like them. He sat on a
throne with a lot of less fancy thrones all around him. When people
died they got to sit on those other thrones forever because they were
such close relatives of the Creator.

The people down here just ate that up!


Another thing the Elders liked about Earthlings was that they feared
and hated other Earthlings who did not look and talk exactly as they
did. They made life a hell for each other as well as for what they
called "lower animals." They actually thought of strangers as lower
animals. So all the Elders had to do to ensure that germs were going
to experience really hard times was to tell us how to make more
effective weapons by studying Physics and Chemistry. The Elders lost
no time in doing this.

They caused an apple to fall on the head of Isaac Newton.

They made young James Watt prick up his ears when his mother's
teakettle sang.


The Elders made us think that the Creator on the big throne hated
strangers as much as we did, and that we would be doing Him a big
favor if we tried to exterminate them by any and all means possible.

That went over big down here.


So it wasn't long before we had made the deadliest poisons in the
Universe, and were stinking up the air and water and topsoil. In the
words of the author, and I wish I knew his name, "Germs died by the
trillions or failed to reproduce because they could no longer cut the
mustard."

But a few survived and even flourished, even though almost all other
life forms on Earth perished. And when all other life forms vanished,
and this planet became as sterile as the Moon, they hibernated as
virtually indestructible spores, capable of waiting as long as
necessary for the next lucky hit by a meteor. Thus, at last, did space
travel become truly feasible.


If you stop to think about it, what the Elders did was based on a sort
of trickle-down theory. Usually when people talk about the
trickle-down theory, it has to do with economics. The richer people at
the top of a society become, supposedly, the more wealth there is to
trickle down to the people below. It never really works out that way,
of course, because if there are 2 things people at the top can't
stand, they have to be leakage and overflow.

But the Elders' scheme of having the misery of higher animals trickle
down to microorganisms worked like a dream.


There was a lot more to the story than that. The author taught me a
new term, which was "Finale Rack." This was apparently from the
vocabulary of pyrotechnicians, specialists in loud and bright but
otherwise harmless nighttime explosions for climaxes of patriotic
holidays. A Finale Rack was a piece of milled lumber maybe 3 meters
long and 20 centimeters wide and 5 centimeters thick, with all sorts
of mortars and rocket launchers nailed to it, linked in series by a
single fuse.

When it seemed that a fireworks show was over, that was when the
Master Pyrotechnician lit the fuse of the Finale Rack.

That is how the author characterized World War II and the few years
that followed it. He called it "the Finale Rack of so-called Human
Progress."


If the author was right that the whole point of life on Earth was to
make germs shape up so that they would be ready to ship out when the
time came, then even the greatest human being in history, Shakespeare
or Mozart or Lincoln or Voltaire or whoever, was nothing more than a
Petri dish in the truly Grand Scheme of Things.

In the story, the Elders of Tralfamadore were indifferent, to say the
least, to all the suffering going on. When 6,000 rebellious slaves
were crucified on either side of the Appian Way back in good old 71
B.C., the

Elders would have been delighted if a crucified person had spit into
the face of a Centurion, giving him pneumonia or TB.


If I had to guess when "The Protocols of the Elders of Tralfamadore"
was written, I would have to say, "A long, long time ago, after World
War II but before the Korean War, which broke out in 1950, when I was
10." There was no mention of Korea as part of the Finale Rack. There
was a lot of talk about making the planet a paradise by killing all
the bugs and germs, and generating electricity with atomic energy so
cheaply that it wouldn't even be metered, and making it possible for
everybody to have an automobile that would make him or her mightier
than 200 horses and 3 times faster than a cheetah, and incinerating
the other half of the planet in case the people there got the idea
that it was their sort of intelligence that was supposed to be
exported to the rest of the Universe.

The story was very likely pirated from some other publication, so the
omission of the author's name may have been intentional. What sort of
writer, after all, would submit a work of fiction for possible
publication in Black Garterbelt?


I did not realize at the time how much that story affected me. Reading
it was simply a way of putting off for just a little while my looking
for another job and another place to live at the age of 51, with 2
lunatics in tow. But down deep the story was beginning to work like a
buffered analgesic. What a relief it was, somehow, to have somebody
else confirm what I had come to suspect toward the end of the Vietnam
War, and particularly after I saw the head of a human being pillowed
in the spilled guts of a water buffalo on the edge of a Cambodian
village, that Humanity is going somewhere really nice was a myth for
children under 6 years old, like the Tooth Fairy and the Easter Bunny
and Santa Claus.


Cough.


I'll tell you one germ that's ready to take off for the belt of Orion
or the handle on the Big Dipper or whatever right now, somewhere on
Earth, and that's the gonorrhea I brought home from Tegucigalpa,
Honduras, back in 1967. For a while there, it looked like I was going
to have it for the rest of my life. By now it probably can eat broken
glass and razor blades.

The TB germs which make me cough so much now, though, are pussycats.
There are several drugs on the market which they have never learned to
handle. The most potent of these was ordered for me weeks ago, and
should be arriving from Rochester at any time. If any of my germs are
thinking of themselves as space cadets, they can forget it. They
aren't going anywhere but down the toilet.

Bon voyage!


But listen to this: You know the 2 lists I've been working on, 1 of
the women I've made love to, and 1 of the men, women, and children
I've killed? It is becoming ever clearer that the lengths of the lists
will be virtually identical! What a coincidence! When I started out
with my list of lovers, I thought that however many of them there were
might serve as my epitaph, a number and nothing more. But by golly if
that same number couldn't stand for the people I've killed!


There's another miracle on the order of Tarkington's students being on
vacation during the diphtheria epidemic, and then again during the
prison break. How much longer can I go on being an Atheist?

"There are more things in heaven and earth. . ."


27

Here is how I got a job at the prison across the lake on the same day
Tarkington College fired me:

I came out of the garage, having read that germs, not people, were the
darlings of the Universe. I got into my Mercedes, intending to go down
to the Black Cat Cafe to pick up gossip, if I could, about anybody who
was hiring anybody to do practically any kind of work anywhere in this
valley. But all 4 tires went bloomp, bloomp, bloomp.

All 4 tires had been cored by Townies the night before. I got out of
the Mercedes and realized that I had to urinate. But I didn't want to
do it in my own house. I didn't want to talk to the crazy people in
there. How is that for excitement? What germ ever lived a life so rich
in challenges and opportunities?

At least nobody was shooting at me, and I wasn't wanted by the police.

So I went into the tall weeds of a vacant lot across the street from
and below my house, which was built on a slope. I whipped out my
ding-dong and found it was aimed down at a beautiful white Italian
racing bicycle lying on its side. The bicycle was so full of magic and
innocence, hiding there. It might have been a unicorn.

After urinating elsewhere, I set that perfect artificial animal
upright. It was brand-new. It had a seat like a banana. Why had
somebody thrown it away? To this day I do not know. Despite our
enormous brains and jam-packed libraries, we germ hotels cannot expect
to understand absolutely everything. My guess is that some kid from a
poor family in the town below came across it while skulking around the
campus. He assumed, as would I, that it belonged to some Tarkington
student who was superrich, who probably had an expensive car and more
beautiful clothes than he could ever wear. So he took it, as would I
when my turn came. But he lost his nerve, as I would not, and hid it
in the weeds rather than face arrest for grand larceny.

As I would soon find out the hard way, the bike actually belonged to a
poor person, a teenage boy who worked in the stable after school, who
had scrimped and saved until he could afford to buy as splendid a
bicycle as had ever been seen on the campus of Tarkington.


To play with my mistaken scenario of the bike's be-longing to a rich
kid: It seemed possible to me that some rich kid had so many expensive
playthings that he couldn't be bothered with taking care of this one.
Maybe it wouldn't fit into the trunk of his Ferrari Gran Turismo. You
wouldn't believe all the treasures, diamond earrings, Rolex watches,
and on and on, that wound up unclaimed in the college's Lost and
Found.

Do I resent rich people? No. The best or worst I can do is notice
them. I agree with the great Socialist writer

George t~rwell, who felt that rich people were poor people with money.
I would discover this to be the majority opinion in the prison across
the lake as well, although nobody over there had ever heard of George
Orwell. Many of the inmates themselves had been poor people with money
before they were caught, with the most costly cars and jewelry and
watches and clothes. Many, as teenage drug dealers, had no doubt owned
bicycles as desirable as the one I found in the weeds in the highlands
of Scipio.

When convicts found out that my car was nothing but a 4-door,
6-cylinder Mercedes, they often scorned or pitied me. It was the same
with many of the students at Tarkington. I might as well have owned a
battered pickup truck.


So I walked that bicycle out of the weeds and onto the steep slope of
Clinton Street. I wouldn't have to pedal or turn a corner in order to
deliver myself to the front door of the Black Cat Cafe. I would have
to use the brakes, however, and I tested those. If the brakes didn't
work, I would go off the end of the dock of the old barge terminal
and, alley-oop, straight into Lake Mohiga.

I straddled the banana-shaped saddle, which turned out to be
surprisingly considerate of my sensitive crotch and hindquarters.
Sailing down a hill on that bicycle in the sunshine wasn't anything
like being crucified.


I parked the bike in plain view in front of the Black Cat Cafe, noting
several champagne corks on the sidewalk and in the gutter. In Vietnam
they would have been cartridge cases. This was where Arthur K. Clarke
had formed up his motorcycle gang for its unopposed assault on
Tarkington. The troops and their ladies had first drunk champagne.
There were also remains of sandwiches, and I stepped on one, which I
think was either cucumber or watercress. I scraped it off on the
curbing, left it there for germs. I'll tell you this, though:

No germ is going to leave the Solar System eating sissy stuff like
that.

Plutonium! Now there's the stuff to put hair on a microbe's chest.


I entered the Black Cat Cafe for the first time in my life. This was
my club now, since I had been busted down to Townie. Maybe, after a
few drinks, I'd go back up the hill and let air out of the tires of
some of Clarke's motorcycles and limousines.

I bellied up to the bar and said, "Give me a wop." That was what I had
heard people down in the town called Budweiser beer, ever since
Italians had bought Anheuser-Busch, the company that made Budweiser.
The Italians got the St. Louis Cardinals, too, as part of the deal.

"Wop coming up," said the barmaid. She was just the kind of woman I
would go for right now, if I didn't have TB. She was in her late 30s,
and had had a lot of bad luck recently, and didn't know where to turn
next. I knew her story. So did everybody else in town. She and her
husband restored an old-time ice cream parlor 2 doors up Clinton
Street from the Black Cat Cafe. But then her husband died because he
had inhaled so much paint remover. The germs inside him couldn't have
felt too great, either.


Who knows, though? The Elders of Tralfamadore may have had her husband
restore the ice cream parlor just so we could have a new strain of
germs capable of surviving a passage through a cloud of paint remover
in outer space.


Her name was Muriel Peck, and her husband Jerry Peck was a direct
descendant of the first President of Tarkington College. His father
grew up in this valley, but Jerry was raised in San Diego, California,
and then he went to work for an ice cream company out there. The ice
cream company was bought by President Mobutu of Zaire, and Jerry was
let go. So he came here with Muriel and their 2 kids to discover his
roots.

Since he already knew ice cream, it made perfect sense for him to buy
the old ice cream parlor. It would have been better for all concerned
if he had known a little less about ice cream and a little more about
paint remover.


Muriel and I would eventually become lovers, but not until I had been
working at Athena Prison for 2 weeks. I finally got nerve enough to
ask her, since she and Jerry had both majored in Literature at
Swarthmore College, if either of them had ever taken the time to read
a label on a can of paint remover.

"Not until it was much too late," she said.


Over at the prison I would encounter a surprising number of convicts
who had been damaged not by paint remover but by paint. When they were
little they had eaten chips or breathed dust from old lead-based
pains. Lead poisoning had made them very stupid. They W?r? all in
prison for the dumbest crimes imaginable, and I was never able to
teach any of them to read and write.

Thanks to them, do we now have germs which eat lead?


I know we have germs which eat petroleum. What their story is, I do
not know. Maybe they're that Honduran gonorrhea.


28

Jerry Peck was in a wheelchair with a tank of oxygen in his lap at the
grand opening of the Mohiga Ice Cream Emporium. But he and Muriel had
a nice little hit on their hands. Tarkingtonians and Townies alike
were pleased by the decor and the luscious ice cream.

After the place had been open for only 6 months, though, a man came in
and photographed everything. Then he pulled out a tape and made
measurements which he wrote down in a book. The Pecks were flattered,
and asked him if he was from an architectural magazine or what. He
said that he worked for the architect who was designing the new
student recreation center up on the hill, the Pahlavi Pavilion. The
Pahlavis wanted it to have an ice cream parlor identical to theirs,
right down to the last detail.

So maybe it wasn't paint remover that killed Jerry Peck after all.


The Pavilion also put the valley's only bowling alley out of business.
It couldn't survive on the business of

Townies alone. So anybody in this area who wanted to bowl and wasn't
connected to Tarkington had to go 30 kilometers to the north, to the
alleys next to the Meadowdale Cinema Complex, across the highway from
the National Guard Armory.


It was a slow time of day at the Black Cat Cafe. There may have been a
few prostitutes in vans in the parking lot out back but none inside.

The owner, Lyle Hooper, who was also Chief of the Volunteer Fire
Department and a Notary, was at the other end of the bar, doing some
kind of bookkeeping. Until the very end of his life, he would never
admit that the availability of prostitutes in his parking lot
accounted in large measure for the business he did in liquor and
snacks, and for the condom machine in the men's room.

To the Elders of Traffamadore, of course, that condom machine would
represent a threat to their space program.


Lyle Hooper surely knew about my sexual exploits, since he had
notarized the affidavits in my portfolio. But he never mentioned them
to me, or so far as I know to anyone. He was the soul of discretion.

Lyle was probably the best-liked man in this valley. Towmes were so
fond of him, men and women alike, that I never heard one call the
Black Cat Cafe a whorehouse. Up on the hill, of course, it was called
almost nothing else.

The Townies protected the image he had of himself, in spite of State
Police raids and visits from the County Health Department, as a family
man who ran a place of refreshment whose success depended entirely on
the quality of the drinks and snacks he served. This kindly conspiracy
protected Lyle's son Charlton, as well. Charlton grew to be 2 meters
tall, and was a New York State High School All-Star basketball center
in his senior year at Scipio High School, and all he ever had to say
about his father was that he ran a restaurant.

Charlton was such a phenomenal basketball player that he was invited
to try out for the New York Knickerbockers, which were still owned by
Americans back then. He accepted a full scholarship to MIT instead,
and became a top scientist running the huge subatomic particle
accelerator called "the Supercollider" outside Waxahachie, Texas.


As I understand it, the scientists down there forced invisible
particles to reveal their secrets by making them go splat on
photographic plates. That isn't all that different from the way we
treated suspected enemy agents in Vietnam sometimes.

Have I already said that I threw one out of a helicopter?


The Townies didn't have to protect the sensibilities of Lyle's wife by
never saying why the Black Cat Cafe was so prosperous. She had left
him. She discovered in midlife that she was a lesbian, and ran off
with the high school's girls' gym teacher to Bermuda, where they gave
and probably still give sailing lessons.

I made a pass at her one time at an Annual Townand-Gown Mixer up on
the hill. I knew she was a lesbian before she did.


At the very end of his life 2 years ago, though, when Lyle Hooper was
a prisoner of the escaped convicts up in the bell tower, he was
addressed by his captors as "Pimp." It was, "Hey, Pimp, how you like
the view7' and "What you think we ought to do with you, Pimp?" and so
on. It was cold and wet up there. Snow or rain blown into the belfry
fell down through a myriad of bullet holes in the ceiling. Those had
been made from below by escaped convicts when they realized that a
sniper was up there among the bells.

There was no electricity. All electric and telephone service had been
shut off. When I visited Lyle up there, he knew the story of those
holes, knew the sniper had been crucified in the stable loft. He knew
that the escaped convicts hadn't decided yet what to do with him. He
knew that he had committed what was in their eyes murder pure and
simple. He and Whitey VanArsdale had ambushed and killed 3 escaped
convicts who were on their way up the old towpath to the head of the
lake, to negotiate with the police and politicians and soldiers at the
roadblock there. The would-be negotiators were carrying flags of
truce, white pillowcases on broomsticks, when Lyle Hooper and Whitey
VanArsdale shot them dead.

And then Whitey was himself shot dead almost immediately, but Lyle was
taken prisoner.

But what bothered Hooper most when I talked to him up in the bell
tower was that his captors called him nothing but "Pimp."


At this point in my story, and in order to simplify the telling, and
not to make any political point, let me from now on call the escaped
convicts in Scipio what they called themselves, which was "Freedom
Fighters."

So Lyle Hooper was without question responsible for the death of 3
Freedom Fighters carrying flags of truce. The Freedom Fighter who was
guarding him in the tower when I came to see him, moreover, was the
half brother and former partner in the crack business, along with
their grandmother, of I of the Freedom Fighters he or Whitey had
killed.

But all Lyle could talk about was the pain of being called a pimp. To
many if not most of the Freedom Fighters, of course, it was no
particular insult to call someone a pimp.


Lyle told me that he had been raised by his paternal grandmother, who
made him promise to leave the world a better place than when he found
it. He said, "Have I done that, Gene?"

I said he had. Since he was facing execution, I certainly wasn't going
to tell him that, in my experience anyway, ambushes made the world
seem an even worse place than it was before.

"I ran a nice, clean place, raised a wonderful son," he said. "Put out
a lot of fires."


It was the Trustees who told the Freedom Fighters that Lyle ran a
whorehouse. Otherwise they would have thought he was just a
restaurateur and Fire Chief.


Lyle Hooper's mood up there in the bell tower reminded me of my
father's mood after he was let go by Barrytron, and he went on a
cruise down the Inland Waterway on the East Coast, from City Island in
New York City to Palm Beach, Florida. This was on a motor yacht owned
by his old college roommate, a man named Fred Handy. Handy had also
studied chemical engi neering, but then had gone into junk bonds
instead. He heard that Father was deeply depressed. He thought the
cruise might cheer Dad up.

But all the way to Palm Beach, where Handy had a waterfront estate,
down the East River, down Barnegat Bay, up Delaware Bay and down
Chesapeake Bay, down the Dismal Swamp Canal, and on and on, the yacht
had to nuzzle its way through a shore-to-shore, horizon-to-horizon
carpet of bobbing plastic bottles. They had contained brake fluid and
laundry bleach and so on.

Father had had a lot to do with the development of those bottles. He
knew, too, that they could go on bobbing for 1,000 years. They were
nothing to be proud of.

In a way, those bottles called him what the Freedom Fighters called
Lyle Hooper.

Lyle's despairing last words as he was led out of the bell tower to be
executed in front of Samoza Hall might be an apt epitaph for my
father:

29

Jayle Hooper's last words, I think we can say with the benefit of
hindsight in the year 2001, might serve as an apt epitaph for a
plurality of working adults in industrialized nations during the 20th
Century. How could they help themselves, when so many of the jobs they
or their mates could get had to do with large-scale deceptions, legal
thefts from public treasuries, or the wrecking of the food chain, the
topsoil, the water, or the atmosphere?


After Lyle Hooper was executed, with a bullet behind the ear, I
visited the Trustees in the stable. Tex Johnson was still spiked to
the cross-timbers in the loft overhead, and they knew it.

But before I tell about that, I had better finish my story of how I
got a job at Athena.


So there I was back in 1991, nursing a Budweiser, or "wop," at the bar
of the Black Cat Cafe. Muriel Peck was telling me how exciting it had
been to see all the motorcycles and limousines and celebrities out
front. She couldn't believe that she had been that close to Gloria
White and Henry Kissinger.

Several of the merry roisterers had come inside to use the toilet or
get a drink of water. Arthur K. Clarke had provided everything but
water and toilets. So Muriel had dared to ask some of them who they
were and what they did.

Three of the people were Black. One Black was an old woman who had
just won $57,000,000 in the New York State Lottery, and the other 2
were baseball players who made $3,000,000 a year.

A white man, who kept apart from the rest, and, according to Muriel,
didn't seem to know what to make of himself, was a daily book reviewer
for The New York Times. He had given a rave review to Clarke's
autobiography, Don't Be Ashamed of Money.

One man who came in to use the toilet, she said, was a famous author
of horror stories that had been made into some of the most popular
movies of all time. I had in fact read a couple of them in Vietnam,
about innocent people getting murdered by walking corpses with axes
and knives and so on.

I passed 1 of them on to Jack Patton, I remember, and asked him later
what he thought of it. And then I stopped him from answering, saying,
"You don't have to tell me, Jack. I already know. It made you want to
laugh like hell."

"Not only that, Major Hartke," he replied. "I thought of what his next
book should be about."

"What's that?" I asked.

"A B-52," he said. "Gore and guts everywhere."

One user of the toilet, who confessed to Muriel that he had diarrhea,
and asked if she had anything behind the bar to stop it, was a retired
Astronaut whom she recognized but couldn't name. She had seen him
again and again in commercials for a sinus-headache remedy and a
retirement community in Cocoa Beach, Florida, near Cape Kennedy.

So Arthur K. Clarke, along with all his other activities, was a
whimsical people-collector. He invited people he didn't really know,
but who had caught his eye for 1 reason or another, to his parties,
and they came, they came. Another one, Muriel told me, was a man who
had inherited from his father a painting by Mark Rothko that had just
been sold to the Getty Museum in Malibu, California, for $37,000,000,
a new record for a painting by an American.

Rothko himself had long since committed suicide.

He had had enough.

He was out of here.


"She's so short," Muriel said to me. "I was so surprised how short she
was."

"Who's so short?" I said.

"Gloria White," she said.


I asked her what she thought of Henry Kissinger. She said she loved
his voice.

I had seen him up on the Quadrangle. Although I had been an instrument
of his geopolitics, I felt no connection between him and me. His face
was certainly familiar. He might have been, like Gloria White,
somebody who had been in a lot of movies I had seen.

I dreamed about him once here in prison, though. He was a woman. He
was a Gypsy fortune-teller who looked into her crystal ball but
wouldn't say anything.


I said to Muriel, "You worry me."

"I what?" she said.

"You look tired," I said. "Do you get enough sleep?"

"Yes, thank you," she said.

"Forgive me," I said. "None of my business. It's just that you were so
full of life while you were talking about the motorcycle people. When
you stopped, it was as though you took off a mask, and you seemed as
though you were suddenly all wrung out."

Muriel knew vaguely who I was. She had seen me with Margaret and
Mildred in tow at least twice a week during the short time the ice
cream parlor was in business. So I did not have to tell her that I,
too, practically speaking, was without a mate. And she had seen with
her own eyes how kind and patient I was with my worse than useless
relatives.

So she was already favorably disposed to me. She trusted me, and
responded with undisguised gratitude to my expressions of concern for
her happiness.

"If you want to know the truth," she said, "I hardly sleep at all, I
worry so much about the children." She had 2 of them. "The way things
are going," she said, "I don't see how I can afford to send even 1 of
them to college. I'm from a family where everybody went to college and
never thought a thing about it. But that's all over now. Neither I is
an athlete."

We might have become lovers that night, I think, instead of 2 weeks
from then, if an ugly mountain of a man hadn't entered raging,
demanding to know, "All right, where is he? Where's that kid?"

He was asking about the kid who worked at Tarking ton's stable after
school, whose bicycle I had stolen. I had left the kid's bike in plain
view out front. Every other place of business on Clinton Street was
boarded up, from the barge terminal to halfway up the hill. So the
only place the boy could be, he thought, was inside the Black Cat Cafe
or, worse, inside one of the vans out back in the parking lot.


I played dumb.

We went outside with him to find out what bicycle he could possibly be
talking about. I offered him the theory that the boy was a good boy,
and nowhere near the Black Cat Cafe, and that some bad person had
borrowed the bike and left it there. So he put the bike on the back of
his beat-up pickup truck, and said he was late for an appointment for
ajob interview at the prison across the lake.

"What kind of a job?" I asked.

And he said, "They're hiring teachers over there."

I asked if I could come with him.

He said, "Not if you're going to teach what I want to teach. What do
you want to teach?"

"Anything you don't want to teach," I said.

"I want to teach shop," he said. "You want to teach shop?"

"No," I said.

"Word of honor?" he said.

"Word of honor," I said.

"OK," he said, "get in, get in."

30

To understand how the lower ranks of guards at Athena in those days
felt about White people, and never mind Black people, you have to
realize that most of them were recruited from Japan's northernmost
island, Hokkaido. On Hokkaido the primitive natives, the Ainus,
thought to be very ugly because they were so paffid and hairy, were
White people. Genetically speaking, they are just as white as Nancy
Reagan. Their ancestors long ago had made the error, when humiliated
by superior Asiatic civilizations, of shambling north instead of west
to Europe, and eventually, of course, to the Western Hemisphere.

Those White people on Hokkaido had sure missed a lot. They were way
behind practically everybody. And when the man who wanted to teach
shop and I presented ourselves at the gate to the road that led
through the National Forest to the prison, the 2 guards on duty there
were fresh from Hokkaido. For all the respect our being Whites
inspired in them, we might as well have been a couple of drunk and
disorderly Arapahos.

The man who wanted to teach shop said his name was John Donner. On the
way over he asked me ill had seen him on the Phil Donahue show on TV.
That was a 1-hour show every weekday afternoon, which featured a small
group of real people, not actors, who had had the same sort of bad
thing happen to them, and had triumphed over it or were barely coping
or whatever. There were 2 very similar programs in competition with
Donahue, and the old novelist Paul Slazinger used to watch all 3
simultaneously, switching back and forth.

I asked him why he did that. He said he didn't want to miss the moment
when, suddenly, there was absolutely nothing left to talk about.


I told John Donner that, unfortunately, I couldn't watch any of those
shows, since I taught Music Appreciation in the afternoon, and then
Martial Arts after that. I asked him what his particular Donahue show
had been about.

"People who were raised in foster homes and got beat up all the time,"
he said.


I would see plenty of Donahue reruns at the prison, but not Donner's.
That show would have been coals to Newcastle at Athena, where
practically everybody had been beaten regularly and severely when he
was a little kid.

I didn't see Donner on TV over there, but I did see myself a couple of
times, or somebody who looked a whole lot like me in the distance, on
old footage of the Vietnam War.

I even yelled 1 time at the prison, "There I am! There I am!"


Convicts gathered behind me, looking at the TV and saying, "Where?
Where? Where?"

But they were too late. I was gone again.

Where did I go?

Here I am.


31

John Donner could have been a pathological liar. He could have made
that up about being on Donahue. There was something very fishy about
him. Then again, he could have been living under the Federal Witness
Protection Program, with a new name and a fake biography GRIOTTM had
written out for him. Statistically speaking, GRIOT~ would have to put
it into a biography every so often, I suppose, that the fictitious
subject was on Donahue.

He claimed that the boy he lived with was his son. But he could have
kidnapped that kid whose bike I stole. They had come to town only
about 18 months before, and kept to themselves.


I am sure his last name wasn't Donner. I have known several Donners.
One was a year behind me at the Academy. Two were unrelated
Tarkingtonians. One was a First Sergeant in Vietnam who had his arm
blown off by a little boy with a homemade handgrenade. Every one of
those Donners knew the story of the infamous Donncr Party, which got
caught in a blizzard back in 1846 while trying to cross the Sierra
Nevada Mountains in wagons to get to California. Their wagons were
very likely made right here in Scipio.

I have just looked up the details in the Encyclopaedia Britannica,
published in Chicago and owned by a mysterious Egyptian arms dealer
living in Switzerland. Rule Britannia!

Those who survived the blizzard did so by becoming cannibals. The
final tally, and several women and children were eaten, was 47
survivors out of 87 people who had begun the trip.

Now there's a subject for Donahue: people who have eaten people.

People who can eat people are the luckiest people in the world.

But when I asked the man who claimed his last name was Donner if he
was any relation to the man who led the Donner Party, he didn't know
what I was talking about.


Whoever he really was, he and I wound up side by side on a hard bench
in the waiting room outside the office of Athena's Warden, Hiroshi
Matsumoto.

While we sat there, incidentally, some supplier to the prison was
stealing the bicycle from the back of Don-ncr's pickup truck.

A mere detail!


Donner told the truth about I thing at least. The Warden was ready to
interview applicants for a teaching job. But we were the only 2
applicants. Donner said he heard about the job opening on the National
Public Radio station in Rochester. That isn't the sort of station
people looking for work are likely to listen to. It is much too
sophisticated.


That was the only area station I know of, incidentally, which said it
was tragic, not funny, what happened to Pamela Ford Hall's 1-woman
show in Buffalo.


There was a Japanese TV set in front of us. There were Japanese TV
sets all over the prison. They were like portholes on an ocean liner.
The passengers were in a state of suspended animation until the big
ship got where it was going. But anytime they wanted, the passengers
could look through a porthole and see the real world out there.

Life was like an ocean liner to a lot of people who weren't in prison,
too, of course. And their TV sets were portholes through which they
could look while doing nothing, to see all the World was doing with no
help from them.

Look at it go!


At Athena, though, the TVs showed nothing but very old shows from a
large library of tapes 2 doors down from the office of Warden
Matsumoto's office.

The tapes weren't played in any particular order. A guard who might
not even understand English kept the central VCR stoked with whatever
came to hand, just as though the cassettes were charcoal briquettes
and the VCR was a hibachi back on Hokkaido.

But this whole scheme was an American invention taken over by the
Japanese, like the VCR and the TV sets. Back when races were mixed in
prisons, the adopted son of a member of the Board of Directors of the
Museum of Broadcasting was sent to Athena for having strangled a
girlfriend behind the Metropolitan Museum of Art. So the father had
hundreds of tapes of TV shows in the library of the Museum of
Broadcasting duplicated and presented to the prison. His dream,
apparently, was that the tapes would provide the basis for a course at
Athena in Broadcasting, which industry some of the inmates might
consider entering after they got out, if they ever got out.

But the course in Broadcasting never materialized. So the tapes were
run over and over again as something better than nothing for the
convicts to look at while they were serving time.


The adopted son of the donor of the tapes came back into the news
briefly at the time the prison populations were being segregated
according to race. There was talk of paroling him and a lot of others
rather than transferring them to other prisons.

But the parents of the girl he had murdered behind the museum, who
were well connected socially, demanded that he serve his full
sentence, which, as I recall it, was 99 years. He was adopted, as I
say. It came out that his biological father had also been a murderer.

So he now may be on one of the aircraft carriers or missile cruisers
in New York Harbor that have been converted into prison ships.


While Donner and I waited to see the Warden, we watched the
assassination of President John F. Kennedy. Bingo! The back of his
head flew off. His wife, wearing a pilibox hat, crawled out over the
trunk of the convertible limousine.

And then the show cut to the police station in Dallas as Lee Harvey
Oswald, the ex-Marine who supposedly shot the President with a
mail-order Italian rifle, was shot in the guts by the owner of a local
strip joint. Oswald said, "Ow." There, yet again, was that "Ow" heard
round the world.

Who says history has to be boring?


Meanwhile, out in the prison parking lot, somebody who had delivered
food or whatever to the prison was taking the bicycle out of Donner's
truck and putting it in his own, and taking off. It was like the
murder of the Lilac Queen back in 1922, a perfect crime.

Cough.


There is even talk now of turning our nuclear submarines into jails
for persons who, like myself, are awaiting trial. They wouldn't
submerge, of course, and the rocket and torpedo tubes and all the
electronic equipment would be sold for junk, leaving more space for
cells.

If the entire submarine fleet were converted into jails, I've heard,
the cells would be filled up at once. When this place stopped being a
college and became a prison, it was filled to the brim before you
could say "Jack Robinson."


I was called into the Warden's Office first. When I came back out,
with not only a job but a place to live, the TV set was displaying a
program I had watched when I was a boy, Howdy Doody. Buffalo Bob, the
host, was about to be sprayed with seltzer water by Clarabell the
Clown.

They were in black and white. That's how old that show was.

I told Donner the Warden wanted to see him, but he didn't seem to know
who I was. I felt as though I were having strangled a girlfriend
behind the Metropolitan Museum of Art. So the father had hundreds of
tapes of TV shows in the library of the Museum of Broadcasting
duplicated and presented to the prison. His dream, apparently, was
that the tapes would provide the basis for a course at Athena in
Broadcasting, which industry some of the inmates might consider
entering after they got out, if they ever got out.

But the course in Broadcasting never materialized. So the tapes were
run over and over again as something better than nothing for the
convicts to look at while they were serving time.


The adopted son of the donor of the tapes came back into the news
briefly at the time the prison populations were being segregated
according to race. There was talk of paroling him and a lot of others
rather than transferring them to other prisons.

But the parents of the girl he had murdered behind the museum, who
were well connected socially, demanded that he serve his full
sentence, which, as I recall it, was 99 years. He was adopted, as I
say. It came out that his biological father had also been a murderer.

So he now may be on one of the aircraft carriers or missile cruisers
in New York Harbor that have been converted into prison ships.


While Donner and I waited to see the Warden, we watched the
assassination of President John F. Kennedy. Bingo! The back of his
head flew off. His wife, wearing a pillbox hat, crawled out over the
trunk of the convertible limousine.

And then the show cut to the police station in Dallas as Lee Harvey
Oswald, the ex-Marine who supposedly shot the President with a
mail-order Italian rifle, was shot in the guts by the owner of a local
strip joint. Oswald said, "Ow." There, yet again, was that "Ow" heard
round the world.

Who says history has to be boring?


Meanwhile, out in the prison parking lot, somebody who had delivered
food or whatever to the prison was taking the bicycle out of Donner's
truck and putting it in his own, and taking off. It was like the
murder of the Lilac Queen back in 1922, a perfect crime.

Cough.


There is even talk now of turning our nuclear submarines into jails
for persons who, like myself, are awaiting trial. They wouldn't
submerge, of course, and the rocket and torpedo tubes and all the
electronic equipment would be sold for junk, leaving more space for
cells.

If the entire submarine fleet were converted into jails, I've heard,
the cells would be filled up at once. When this place stopped being a
college and became a prison, it was filled to the brim before you
could say "Jack Robinson."


I was called into the Warden's Office first. When I came back out,
with not only a job but a place to live, the TV set was displaying a
program I had watched when I was a boy, Howdy Doody. Buffalo Bob, the
host, was about to be sprayed with seltzer water by Clarabell the
Clown.

They were in black and white. That's how old that show was.

I told Donner the Warden wanted to see him, but he didn't seem to know
who I was. I felt as though I were trying to wake up a mean drunk. I
used to have to do that a lot in Vietnam. A couple of times the mean
drunks were Generals. The worst was a visiting Congressman.

I thought I might have to fight Donner before he realized that Howdy
Doody wasn't the main thing going on.


Warden Hiroshi Matsumoto was a survivor of the atom-bombing of
Hiroshima, when I was 5 and he was 8. When the bomb was dropped, he
was playing soccer during school recess. He chased a ball into a ditch
at one end of the playing field. He bent over to pick up the ball.
There was a flash and wind. When he straightened up, his city was
gone. He was alone on a desert, with little spirals of dust dancing
here and there. But I would have to know him for more than 2 years
before he told me that.

His teachers and schoolmates were executed without trial for the crime
of Emperor Worship.

Like St. Joan of Arc, they were burned alive.


Crucifixion as a mode of execution for the very worst criminals was
outlawed by the first Christian Roman Emperor, who was Constantine the
Great.

Burning and boiling were still OK.


If I had had more time to think about it, I might not have applied for
a job at Athena, realizing that I would have had to admit that I had
served in Vietnam, killing or trying to kill nothing but Orientals.
And my interviewer would surely be Oriental.

Yes, and no sooner did Warden Matsumoto hear that

I was a West Pointer than he said with terrible heaviness, "Then of
course you spent time in Vietnam."

I thought to myself, "Oh oh. There goes the ball game."

I misread him completely, not knowing then that the Japanese
considered themselves to be as genetically discrete from other
Orientals as from me or Donner or Nancy Reagan or the pallid, hairy
Ainus, say.

"A soldier does what he is ordered to do," I said. "I never felt good
about what I had to do." This wasn't entirely true. I had gotten high
as a kite on the fighting now and then. I actually killed a man with
my bare hands I time. He had tried to kill me. I barked like a dog and
laughed afterward, and then threw up.


My confession that I had served in Vietnam, to my amazement, made
Warden Matsumoto feel that we were almost brothers! He came out from
behind his desk to take me by the hand and stare into my eyes. It was
an odd experience for me, simply from the physical standpoint, since
he was wearing a surgical mask and rubber gloves.

"So we both know what it is," he said, "to be shipped to an alien land
on a dangerous mission of vainglorious lunacy!"

32

What an afternoon!

Only 3 hours before, I had been so at peace in my bell tower. Now I
was inside a maximum-security prison, with a masked and gloved
Japanese national who insisted that the United States was his Vietnam!

What is more, he had been in the middle of student antiwar protests
over here when the Vietnam War was going on. His corporation had sent
him to the Harvard Business School to study the minds of the movers
and shakers who were screwing up our economy for their own immediate
benefit, taking money earmarked for research and development and new
machinery and so on, and putting it into monumental retirement plans
and year-end bonuses for themselves.

During our interview, he used all the antiwar rhetoric he had heard at
Harvard in the '60s to denounce his own country's overseas disaster.
We were a quagmire. There was no light at the end of the tunnel over
here, and on and on.

Until that moment, I had not given a thought to the mental state of
members of the ever-growing army of Japanese nationals in this
country, who had to make a financial go of all the properties their
corporations had bought out from under us. And it really must have
felt to most of them like a war overseas about Heaven knows what, and
especially since, as was my case in Vietnam, they were color-coded in
contrast with the majority of the native population.


On the subject of color-coding: You might have expected that a lot of
black people would be shot after the prison break, even though they
weren't escaped convicts. The state of mind of Whites in this valley,
certainly, was that any Black male had to be an escapee.

Shoot first, and ask questions afterward. I sure used to do that.

But the only person who wasn't an escapee who got shot just for being
black was a nephew of the Mayor of Troy. And he was only winged. He
lost the use of his right hand, but that has since been repaired by
the miracle of microsurgery.

He was left-handed anyway.

He was winged when he was where he wasn't supposed to be, where nobody
of any race was supposed to be. He was camping in the National Forest,
which is against the law. He didn't even know there had been a prison
break.

And then: Bang!


And here I am capitalizing "Black" and "White" sometimes, and then not
capitalizing them, and not feeling right about how the words look
either way. That could be because sometimes race seems to matter a
tremendous lot, and other times race seems to matter a little less
than that. And I keep wanting to say "so-called Black" or "so-called
black." My guess is that well over half the inmates at Athena, and now
in this prison here, had white or White ancestors. Many appear to be
mostly white, but they get no credit for that.

Imagine what that must feel like.

I myself have claimed a black ancestor, since this is a prison for
Blacks only, and I don't want to be transferred out of here. I need
this library. You can imagine what sorts of libraries they must have
on the aircraft carriers and missile cruisers which have been
converted into prison ships.


This is home.


My lawyer says I am smart not to want to be'transferred, but for other
reasons. A transfer might put me back in the news again, and raise a
popular clamor for my punishment.

As matters stand now, I am forgotten by the general public, and so,
for that matter, is the prison break. The break was big news on TV for
only about 10 days.

And then it was displaced as a headliner by a lone White girl. She was
the daughter of a gun nut in rural northern California. She wiped out
the Prom Committee of her high school with a Chinese handgrenade from
World War II.

Her father had one of the World's most complete collections of
handgrenades.


Now his collection isn't as complete as it used to be, unless, of
course, he had more than 1 Chinese handgrenade from the Finale Rack.

Warden Matsumoto became chattier and chattier during my job interview.
Before he was sent to Athena, he said, he ran a hospital-for-profit
his corporation had bought in Louisville. He loved the Kentucky Derby.
But he hated his job.

I told him I used to go to the horse races in Saigon every chance I
got.

He said, "I only wish our Chairman of the Board back in Tokyo could
have spent just one hour with me in our emergency room, turning away
dying people because they could not afford our services."


"You had a body count in Vietnam, I believe?" he said.

It was true. We were ordered to count how many people we killed so
that higher headquarters, all the way back to Washington, D.C., could
estimate how much closer, even if it was only a teeny-weeny bit
closer, all our efforts were bringing us to victory. There wasn't any
other way to keep score.

"So now we count dollars the way you used to count bodies," he said.
"What does that bring us closer to? What does it mean? We should do
with those dollars what you did with the bodies. Bury and forget them!
You were luckier with your bodies than we are with all our dollars."

"How so?" I said.

"All anybody can do with bodies is burn them or bury them," he said.
"There isn't any nightmare afterwards, when you have to invest them
and make them grow."


"What a clever trap your Ruling Class set for us," he went on. "First
the atomic bomb. Now this."

"Trap?" I echoed wonderingly.

"They looted your public and corporate treasuries, and turned your
industries over to nincompoops," he said. "Then they had your
Government borrow so heavily from us that we had no choice but to send
over an Army of Occupation in business suits. Never before has the
Ruling Class of a country found a way to stick other countries with
all the responsibilities their wealth might imply, and still remain
rich beyond the dreams of avarice! No wonder they thought the comatose
Ronald Reagan was a great President!"


His point was well taken, it seems to me.

When Jason Wilder and all the rest of the Trustees were hostages in
the stable, and I paid them a call, I got the distinct impression that
they regarded Americans as foreigners. What nationality that made them
is hard to say.


They were all White, and they were all Male, since Lowell Chung's
mother had died of tetanus. She died before the doctors could
understand what was killing her. None of them had ever seen a case of
tetanus before, because practically everybody in this country in the
old days had been immunized.

Now that public health programs have pretty much fallen apart, and no
foreigners are interested in running them, which is certainly
understandable, quite a number of cases of tetanus, and especially
among children, are turning up again.

So most doctors know what it looks like now. Mrs. Chung had the
misfortune to be a pioneer.

The hostages told me about that. One of the first things I said to
them was, "Where is Madam Chung?"


I thought I should reassure the Trustees after the execution of Lyle
Hooper. His corpse had been shown to them as a warning, I suppose,
against their making any plans for derring-do. That body was surely
icing on the cake of terror, so to speak. The College President, after
all, was dangling from spikes in the loft above.

One of the hostages said in a TV interview after he was liberated that
he would never forget the sound of Tex Johnson's head bouncing on the
steps as Tex was dragged up to the loft feet first. He tried to
imitate the sound. He said, "Bloomp, bloomp, bloomp," the same sound a
flat tire makes.

What a planet!


The hostages expressed pity for Tex, but none for Lyle Hooper, and
none for all the other faculty members and Townies who were also dead.
The locals were too insignificant for persons on their social level to
think about. I don't fault them for this. I think they were being
human.

The Vietnam War couldn't have gone on as long as it did, certainly, if
it hadn't been human nature to regard persons 1 didn't know and didn't
care to know, even if they were in agony, as insignificant. A few
human beings have struggled against this most natural of tendencies,
and have expressed pity for unhappy strangers. But, as History shows,
as History yells: "They have never been numerous!"


Another flaw in the human character is that everybody wants to build
and nobody wants to do maintenance.

And the worst flaw is that we're just plain dumb. Admit it!

You think Auschwitz was intelligent?


When I tried to tell the hostages a little about their captors, about
their childhoods and mental illnesses, and their not caring if they
lived or died, and what prison was like, and so on, Jason Wilder
actually closed his eyes and covered his ears. He was being theatrical
rather than practical. He didn't cover his ears so well that he
couldn't hear me.

Others shook their heads and indicated in other ways that such
information was not only tiresome but offensive. It was as though we
were in a thunderstorm, and I had begun lecturing on the circulation
of electrical charges in clouds, and the formation of raindrops, and
the paths chosen by lightning strokes, and what thunder was, and on
and on. All they wanted to know was when the storm would stop, so they
could go on about their business.

What Warden Matsumoto had said about people like them was accurate.
They had managed to convert their wealth, which had originally been in
the form of factories or stores or other demanding enterprises, into a
form so liquid and abstract, negotiable representations of money on
paper, that there were few reminders coming from anywhere that they
might be responsible for anyone outside their own circle of friends
and relatives.


They didn't rage against the convicts. They were mad at the Government
for not making sure that escapes from prison were impossible. The more
they ran on like that, the clearer it became that it was their
Government, not mine or the convicts' or the Townies'. Its first duty,
moreover, was to protect them from the lower classes, not only in this
country but everywhere.

Were people on Easy Street ever any different?

Think again about the crucifixions of Jesus and the 2 thieves, and the
6,000 slaves who followed the gladiator Spartacus.


Cough.


My body, as I understand it, is attempting to contain the TB germs
inside me in little shells it builds around them. The shells are
calcium, the most common element in the walls of many prisons,
including Athena. This place is ringed by barbed wire. So was
Auschwitz.

If I die of TB, it will be because my body could not build prisons
fast enough and strong enough.

Is there a lesson there? Not a cheerful one.


If the Trustees were bad, the convicts were worse. I would be the last
person to say otherwise. They were devastators of their own
communities with gunfights and robberies and rapes, and the
merchandising of brain-busting chemicals and on and on.

But at least they saw what they were doing, whereas people like the
Trustees had a lot in common with B-52 bombardiers way up in the
stratosphere. They seldom saw the devastation they caused as they
moved the huge portion of this country's wealth they controlled from
here to there.


Unlike my Socialist grandfather Ben Wills, who was a nobody, I have no
reforms to propose. I think any form of government, not just
Capitalism, is whatever the people who have all our money, drunk or
sober, sane or insane, decide to do today.


Warden Matsumoto was an odd duck. Many of his quirks were no doubt a
consequence of his having had an atomic bomb dropped on him in
childhood. The buildings and trees and bridges and so on which had
seemed so substantial vanished like fantasies.

As I've said, Hiroshima was suddenly a blank table-land with little
dust devils spinning here and there.

After the flash, little Hiroshi Matsumoto was the only real thing on
the table. He began a long, long walk in search of anything else that
was also real. When he reached the edge of the city, he found himself
among structures and creatures both real and fantastic, living people
with their skins hanging on their exposed muscles and bones like
draperies, and so on.

These images about the bombing are all his, by the way. But I wouldn't
hear them from him until I had been teaching at the prison and living
next door to him by the lake for 2 long years.


Whatever else being atom-bombed had done to him, it had not destroyed
his conscience. He had hated turning away poor people from the
emergency room at the hospital-for-profit he ran in Louisville. After
he took over the prison-for-profit at Athena, he thought there ought
to be some sort of educational program there, even though his
corporation's contract with New York State required him to keep the
prisoners from escaping and nothing more.


He worked for Sony. He never worked for anybody but Sony.

"New York State," he said, "does not believe that education can
rehabilitate the sort of criminal who ends up at Athena or Attica or
Sing Sing." Attica and Sing Sing were for Hispanics and Whites
respectively, who, like the inmates at Athena, had been convicted of
at least 1 murder and 2 other violent crimes. The other 2 were likely
to be murders, too.

"I don't believe it, either," he said. "I do know this, though: 10
percent of the people inside these walls still have minds, but there
is nothing for those minds to play with. So this place is twice as
painful for them as it is for the rest. A good teacher just might be
able to give their minds new toys, Math or Astronomy or History, or
who knows what, which would make the passage of time just a little bit
more bearable. What do you think?"

"You're the boss," I said.


He really was the boss, too. He had made such a financial success of
Athena that his corporate superiors allowed him to be completely
autonomous. They had contracted with the State to take care of
prisoners for only 2 thirds as much money per capita as the State had
spent when it owned the place. That was about as much as it would have
cost to send a convict to medical school or Tarkington. By importing
cheap, young, short-term, nonunion labor, and by getting supplies from
the lowest bidders rather than from the Mafia and so on, Hiroshi
Matsumoto had cut the per capita cost to less than half of what it
used to be.

He didn't miss a trick. When I went to work for him, he had just
bought a state-of-the-art crematorium for the prison. Before that, a
Mafia-owned crematorium on the outskirts of Rochester, in back of the
Meadowdale

Cinema Complex, across the highway from the National Guard Armory, had
had a monopoly on cremating Athena's unclaimed bodies.

After the Japanese bought Athena, though, the Mob doubled their
prices, using the AIDS epidemic as an excuse. They had to take extra
precautions, they said. They wanted double even if the prison provided
a doctor's certificate guaranteeing that a body was AIDS-free, and the
cause of death, as anybody could see, was some sort of knife or
garrote or blunt instrument.


There wasn't a Japanese manufacturer of crematoria, so Warden
Matsumoto bought one from A. J. Topfund Sohn in Essen, Germany. This
was the same outfit that had made the ovens for Auschwitz in its
heyday.

The postwar Topf models all had state-of-the-art smoke scrubbers on
their smokestacks, so people in Scipio, unlike the people living near
Auschwitz, never knew that they had a busy corpse carbonizer in the
neighborhood.

We could have been gassing and incinerating convicts over there around
the clock, and who would know?


Who would care?


A while back I mentioned that Lowell Chung's mother died of tetanus. I
want to say before I forget that tetanus might have a real future in
astronautics, since it becomes an extremely rugged spore when life
becomes intolerable.


I haven't nominated AIDS viruses as promising intergalactic rock
jockeys, since, at their present state of development, they can't
survive for long outside a living human body.

Concerted efforts to kill them with new poisons, though, if only
partially successful, could change all that.


The Mafia crematorium behind the Meadowdale Cinema Complex has all
this valley's prison business again. Some of the convicts who stayed
in or near Athena after the great escape, rather than attack Scipio
across the ice, felt that at least they could bust up the A. J. Topf
und Sohn crematorium.

The Meadowdale Cinema Complex itself has gone belly up, since so few
people can afford to own an automobile anymore.

Same thing with the shopping malls.


One thing interesting to me, although I don't know quite what to make
of it, is that the Mafia never sells anything to foreigners. While
everybody else who has inherited or built a real business can't wait
to sell out and take early retirement, the Mafia holds on to
everything. Thus does the paving business, for example, remain a
strictly American enterprise.

Same thing with wholesale meat and napkins and tablecloths for
restaurants.


I told the Warden right up front that I had been canned by Tarkington.
I explained that the charges against me for sexual irregularities were
a smokescreen. The Trustees were really angry about my having wobbled
the students' faith in the intelligence and decency of their country's
leadership by telling them the truth about the Vietnam War.

"Nobody on this side of the lake believes there is such a thing in
this miserable country," he said.

"Such a thing as what, sir?" I said.

And he said, "Leadership." As for my sexual irregularities, he said,
they seemed to be uniformly heterosexual, and there were no women on
his side of the lake. He himself was a bachelor, and members of his
staff were not allowed to bring their wives with them, if they had
them. "So over here," he said, "you would truly be Don Juan in Hell.
Do you think that you could stand that?"

I said I could, so he offered me a job on a trial basis. I would start
work as soon as possible, offering general education mostly on the
primary-school level, not all that different from what I had done at
Tarkington. An immediate problem was housing. His staff lived in
barracks in the shadows of the prison walls, and he himself had a
renovated house down by the water and was the only inhabitant of the
ghost town, a ghost hamlet, actually, after which the prison was
named: Athena.


If I didn't work out for some reason, he said, he would still need a
teacher on the property, who would surely not want to live in the
barracks. So he was having another old house in the ghost town made
livable, right next to his own. But it wouldn't be ready for occupancy
until August. "Do you think the college will let you stay where you
are until then, and meanwhile you could commute to work from over
there? You have a car?"

"A Mercedes," I said.

"Excellent!" he said. "That will give you something in common with the
inmates right away."

"How so?" I said.

"They're practically all former Mercedes owners," he said. This was
only a slight exaggeration. He told the truth when he said, "We have
one man in here who bought his first Mercedes when he was 15 years
old." That was Alton Darwin, whose dying words on the skating rink
after the prison break would be, "See the Nigger fly the airplane."


So the college did let us stay in the Scipio house over the summer.
There was no summer session at Tarkington. Who would have come to one?
And I commuted to the prison every day.

In the old days, before the Japanese took over Athena, the whole staff
was commuters from Scipio and Rochester. They were unionized, and it
was their unceasing demands for more and more pay and fringe benefits,
including compensation for their travel to and from work, that made
the State decide to sell the whole shebang to the Japanese.


My salary was what I had been paid by Tarkington. I could keep our
Blue Cross¡XBlue Shield, since the corporation that owned the prison
also owned Blue Cross¡X Blue Shield. No problem!

Cough.


That is another thing the prison break cost me: our Blue Cross¡XBlue
Shield.

33

It would work out well. When I moved Margaret and Mildred into our new
home in the ghost town and pulled down the blinds, it was to them as
though we had never left Scipio. There was a surprise present for me
on our freshly sodded front lawn, a rowboat. The Warden had found an
old boat that had been lying in the weeds behind the ruins of the old
Athena Post Office since before I was born, quite possibly. He had had
some of his guards fiberglass the outside of it, making it watertight
again after all these years.

It looked a lot like the hide-covered Eskimo uiniak that used to be in
the rotunda outside the Dean of Women's Office here, with the outlines
of the ribs showing through the fiberglass.

I know what happened to a lot of college property after the prison
break, the GRIOTTM and so on, but I haven't a clue what became of that
umiak.

If it hadn't been on display in the rotunda, I and hundreds of
Tarkington students and their parents would have gone all the way
through life without ever seeing a genuine Eskimo umiak.


I made love to Muriel Peck in that boat. I lay on the bottom, and she
sat upright, holding my mother-in-law's fishing rod, pretending to be
a perfect lady and all alone.

That was my idea. What a good sport she was!


I don't know what became of the man who claimed his name was John
Donner, who wanted to teach shop at Athena, 8 years before the prison
break. I do know that the Warden gave him very short shrift during his
job interview, since the last things the prison needed inside its
walls were chisels and screwdrivers and hacksaws and band saws and
ball-peen hammers and so on.

I had to wait for Donner outside the Warden's Office. He was my ticket
back to civilization, to my home and family and copy of Black
Garterbelt. I didn't watch Howdy Doody on the little screen. I
interested myself in another person, who was waiting to see the
Warden. His color-coding alone would have told me that he was a
convict, but he was also wearing leg irons and handcuffs, and was
seated quietly on a bench facing mine across the corridor, with a
masked and rubber-gloved guard on either side of him.

He was reading a cheap-looking booklet. Since he was literate, I
thought he might be one of the people I was being hired to divert with
knowledge. I was right. His name was Abdullah Akbahr. With my
encouragement, he would write several interesting short stories. One,
I remember, was supposedly the autobiography of a talking deer in the
National Forest who has a terrible time finding anything to eat in
winter and gets tangled in barbed wire during the summer months,
trying to get at the delicious food on farms. He is shot by a hunter.
As he dies he wonders why he was born in the first place. The final
sentence of the story was the last thing the deer said on Earth. The
hunter was close enough to hear it and was amazed. This was it: "What
the blankety-blank was that supposed to be all about?"


The 3 violent crimes that had gotten Abdullah into Athena were murders
in drug wars. He himself would be shot dead with buckshot and slugs
after the prison break, while carrying a flag of truce, by Whitey
VanArsdale, the mechanic, and Lyle Hooper, the Fire Chief.

"Excuse me," I said to him, "but may I ask what you are reading?"

He displayed the book's cover so I could read it for myself. The title
was The Protocols of the Elders of Zion.

Cough.

Abdullah was summoned to the Warden's Office, incidentally, because he
was 1 of several persons, guards as well as convicts, who claimed to
have seen a castle flying over the prison. The Warden wanted to find
out if some new hallucinatory drug had been smuggled in, or whether
the whole place was finally going insane, or what on Earth was
happening.


The Protocols of the Elders of Zion was an anti-Semitic work first
published in Russia about 100 years ago. It purported to be the
minutes of a secret meeting of Jews from many countries who planned to
cooperate internationally so as to cause wars and revolutions and
financial busts and so on, which would leave them owning everything.
Its title was parodied by the author of the story in Black Garterbelt,
and its paranoia, too.

The great American inventor and industrialist Henry Ford thought it
was a genuine document. He had it published in this country back when
my father was a boy. Now here was a black convict in irons, who had
the gift of literacy, who was taking it seriously. It would turn out
that there were lOOs of copies circulating in the prison, printed in
Libya and passed out by the ruling gang at Athena, the Black Brothers
of Islam.


That summer I would start a literacy program in the prison, using
people like Abdullah Akbahr as proselytizers for reading and writing,
going from cell to cell and offering lessons. Thanks to me, l,000s of
former illiterates would be able to read The Protocols of the Elders
of Zion by the time of the prison break.

I denounced that book, but couldn't keep it from circulating. Who was
I to oppose the Black Brothers, who regularly exercised what the State
would not, which was the death penalty.


Abdullah Akbahr rattled and clinked his fetters. "This any way to
treat a veteran?" he said.

He had been a Marine in Vietnam, so he never had to listen to one of
my pep talks. I was strictly Army. I asked him if he had ever heard of
an Army officer they called "The Preacher," who was me, of course. I
was curious as to how far my fame had spread.

"No," he said. But as I've said, there were other veterans there who
had heard of me and knew, among other things, that I had pitched a
grenade into the mouth of a tunnel one time, and killed a woman, her
mother, and her baby hiding from helicopter gunships which had strafed
her village right before we got there.

Unforgettable.

You know who was the Ruling Class that time? Eugene Debs Hartke was
the Ruling Class.


Down with the Ruling Class!


John Donner was unhappy on our trip back to Scipio from the prison. I
had landed a job, and he hadn't. His son's bicycle had been stolen in
the prison parking lot.

The Mexicans have a favorite dish they call "twice-fried beans."
Thanks to me, although Donner never found out, that bicycle was now a
twice-stolen bicycle. One week later, Donner and the boy
dematerialized from this valley as mysteriously as they had
materialized, leaving no forwarding address.

Somebody or something must have been catching up with them.


I pitied that boy. But if he is still alive, he, like me, is a grownup
now.


Somebody was catching up with me, too, but ever so slowly. I am
talking about my illegitimate son out in Dubuque, Iowa. He was only 15
then. He didn't even know my name yet. He had yet to do as much
detective work to discover the name and location of his father as I
have done to identify the murderer of Letitia Smiley, Tarkington
College's 1922 Lilac Queen.


I made the acquaintance of his mother while sitting alone at a bar in
Manila, soon after the excrement hit the air-conditioning in Vietnam.
I didn't want to talk to anybody of either sex. I was fed up with the
human race. I wanted nothing more than to be left strictly alone with
my thoughts.

Add those to my growing collection of Famous Last Words.


This reasonably pretty but shopworn woman sat down on a stool next to
mine. "Forgive my intrusion on your thoughts," she said, "but somebody
told me that you are the man they call 'The Preacher.' "She pointed
out a Master Sergeant in a booth with 2 prostitutes who could not have
been much over 15 years of age.

"I don't know him," I said.

"He didn't say he knew you," she said. "He's heard you speak. So have
a lot of other soldiers I've talked to."

"Somebody had to speak," I said, "or we couldn't have had a war."

"Is that why they call you 'The Preacher'?" she said. "Who knows," I
said, "in a world as full of baloney as this 1 is?" I had been called
that as far back as West Point because I never used profanity. During
my first 2 years in Vietnam, when the only troops I gave pep talks to
were those who served under me, I was called "The Preacher" because it
sounded sinister, as though I were a puritanical angel of death. Which
I was, I was.

"Would you rather I went away?" she said.

"No," I said, "because I think there is every chance we could wind up
in bed together tonight. You look intelligent, so you must be as blue
as I am about our nation's great unvictory. I worry about you. I'd
like to cheer you up."

What the heck.

It worked.


If it ain't broke, don't fix it.

34

I was reasonably happy teaching at the prison. I raised the level of
literacy by about 20 percent, with each newly literate person teaching
yet another one. I wasn't always happy with what they chose to read
afterward.

One man told me that literacy made it a lot more fun for him to
masturbate.


I did not loaf. I like to teach.

I dared some of the more intelligent prisoners to prove to me that the
World was round, to tell me the difference between noise and music, to
tell me how physical traits were inherited, to tell me how to
determine the height of a guard tower without climbing it, to tell me
what was ridiculous about the Greek legend which said that a boy
carried a calf around a barn every day, and pretty soon he was a man
who could carry a bull around the barn every day, and so on.

I showed them a chart a fundamentalist preacher from downtown Scipio
had passed out to Tarkington students at the Pavilion one afternoon. I
asked them to examine it for examples of facts tailored to fit a
thesis. Across the top the chart named the leaders of warring nations
during the Finale Rack, during World War II. Then, under each name was
the leader's birthdate and how many years he lived and when he took
office and how many years he served, and then the total of all those
numbers, which in each case turned out to be

3,888.

It looked like this:


	CHURCHILL HITLER ROOSEVELT IL DUCE STALIN TOJO

BORN	1874	  1889	 1882	   1883	   1879	  1884

AGE	70	  55	 62	   61	   65	  60

TOOK

OFFICE	1940	  1933	 1933	   1922	   1924	  1941

YEARS IN

OFFICE	4	  11	 11	   22	   20	  3




As I say, every column adds up to 3,888.

Whoever invented the chart then pointed out that half that number was
1944, the year the war ended, and that the first letters of the names
of the war's leaders spelled the name of the Supreme Ruler of the
Universe.


The dumber ones, like the dumber ones at Tarkington, used me as an
ambulatory Guinness Book of World Records, asking me who the oldest
person in the world was, the richest one, the woman who had had the
most babies, and so on. By the time of the prison break, I think, 98
percent of the inmates at Athena knew that the greatest age ever
attained by a human being whose birthdate was well documented was
about 121 years, and that this incomparable survivor, like the Warden
and the guards, had been Japanese. Actually, he had fallen 128 days
short of reaching 121. His record was a natural foundation for all
sorts of jokes at Athena, since so many of the inmates were serving
life sentences, or even 2 or 3 life sentences either superimposed or
laid end to end.

They knew that the richest man in the world was also Japanese and
that, about a century before the college and the prison were founded
across the lake from each other, a woman in Russia was giving birth to
the last of her 69 children.


The Russian woman who had more babies than anyone gave birth to 16
pairs of twins, 7 sets of triplets, and 4 sets of quadruplets. They
all survived, which is more than you can say for the Donner Party.


Hiroshi Matsumoto was the only member of the prison staff with a
college education. He did not socialize with the others, and he took
his off-duty meals alone and hiked alone and fished alone and sailed
alone. Neither did he avail himself of the Japanese clubs in Rochester
and Buffalo, or of the lavish rest-and-recuperation facilities
maintained in Manhattan by the Japanese Army of Occupation in Business
Suits. He had made so much money for his corporation in Louisville and
then Athena, and was so brilliant in his understanding of American
business psychology, that I am sure he could have asked for and gotten
an executive job in the home office. He may have known more about
American black people than anybody else in Japan, thanks to Athena,
and more and more of the businesses his corporation was buying here
were dependent on black labor or at least the goodwill of black
neighborhoods. Again thanks to Athena, he probably knew more than any
other Japanese about the largest industry by far in this country,
which was the procurement and distribution of chemicals that, when
introduced into the bloodstream in one way or another, gave anybody
who could afford them undeserved feelings of purpose and
accomplishment.

Only 1 of these chemicals was legal, of course, and was the basis of
the fortune of the family that gave

Tarkington its band uniforms, and the water tower atop

Musket Mountain, and an endowed chair in Business

Law, and I don't know what all else. That mind-bender was alcohol.


In the 8 years we lived next door to him in the ghost town down by the
lake, he never once indicated that he longed to be back in his
homeland. The closest he came to doing that was when he told me 1
night that the ruins of the locks at the head of the lake, with huge
timbers and boulders tumbled this way and that, might have been the
creation of a great Japanese gardener.

In the Japanese Army of Occupation he was a high-ranking officer, the
civilian peer of a Brigadier, maybe, or even a Major General. But he
reminded me of several old Master Sergeants I had known in Vietnam.
They would say worse things about the Army and the war and the
Vietnamese than anybody. But I would go away for a couple of years,
and then come back, and they were all still there, crabbing away. They
wouldn't leave until the Vietnamese either killed them or kicked them
out of there.

How they hated home. They were more afraid of home than of the enemy.


Hiroshi Matsumoto called this valley a "hellhole" and the "anus of the
Universe." But he didn't leave it until he was kicked out of here.

I wonder if the Mohiga Valley hadn't become the only home he ever knew
after the bombing of Hiroshima. He lives in retirement now in his
reconstructed native city, having lost both feet to frostbite after
the prison break. Is it possible that he is thinking now what I have
thought so often: "What is this place and who are these people, and
what am I doing here?"


The last time I saw him was on the night of the prison break. We had
been awakened by the racket of the Jamaicans' assault on the prison.
We both came running out onto the street in front of our houses
barefoot and in our nightclothes, although the temperature must have
been minus 10 degrees centigrade.

The name of our main street in the ghost town was Clinton Street, the
name of the main street in Scipio. Can you imagine that: two
communities so close geographically, and yet in olden times so
separate socially and economically that, with all the street names
they might have chosen, they both named their main street Clinton
Street?


The Warden tried to reach the prison on a cordless telephone. He got
no answer. His 3 house servants were looking out at us from upstairs
windows. They were convicts over 70 years old, serving life sentences
without hope of parole, long forgotten by the outside world, and coked
to the gills on Thorazine.

My mother-in-law came out on our porch. She called to me, "Tell him
about the fish I caught! Tell him about that fish I caught!"

The Warden said to me that a boiler up at the prison must have blown,
or maybe the crematorium. It sounded to me like military weaponry,
whose voices he had never heard. He hadn't even heard the atomic bomb
go off. He had only felt the hot whoosh afterward.

And then all the lights on our side of the lake went off. And then we
heard the strains of "The Star-Spangled Banner" floating down from the
blacked-out penitentiary.


There was no way that the Warden and I, even with massive doses of
LSD, could have imagined what was going on up there. We were faulted
afterward for not having alerted Scipio. As far as that goes, Scipio,
hearing the explosion and "The Star-Spangled Banner" and all the rest
of it across the frozen lake, might have been expected to take some
defensive action. But it did not.

Survivors over there I talked to afterward said they had just pulled
the covers over their heads and gone to sleep again. What could be
more human?


What was happening up there, as I've already said, was a stunningly
successful attack on the prison by Jamaicans wearing National Guard
uniforms and waving American flags. They had a public-address system
mounted atop an armored personnel carrier and were playing the
National Anthem. Most of them probably weren't even American citizens!

But what Japanese farm boy, serving a 6-month tour of duty on a dark
continent, would be crazy enough to open fire on seeming natives in
full battle dress, who were waving flags and playing their hellish
music?

No such boy existed. Not that night.

If the Japanese had started shooting, they would have lost their lives
like the defenders of the Alamo. And for what?


For Sony?


Hiroshi Matsumoto threw on some clothes! He drove up the hill in his
Isuzu jeep!

He was fired upon by the Jamaicans!

He bailed out of his Isuzu! He ran into the National Forest!

He got lost in the pitch blackness. He was wearing sandals and no
socks.

It took him 2 days to find his way back out of the forest, which was
almost as dark in the daytime as it was at night.

Yes. And gangrene was feasting on his frostbitten feet.


I myself stayed down by the lake.

I sent Mildred and Margaret back to bed.

I heard what must have been the Jamaicans' shots at the Isuzu. Those
were their parting shots. After that came silence.

My brain came up with this scenario: An attempted escape had been
thwarted, possibly with some loss of life. The explosion at the
beginning had been a bomb made by the convicts from nail parings or
playing cards or who knows what?

They could make bombs and alcohol out of anything, usually in a
toilet.


I misread the silence as good news.

I dreaded a continuation of the shooting, which would have meant to me
that the Japanese farm boys had developed a taste for killing with
guns, which can suddenly become, for the uninitiated, easy and fun.

I envisioned convicts, in or out of their cells, becoming ducks in a
shooting gallery.


I imagined, now that there was silence, that order had been restored,
and that an English-speaking Japanese was notifying the Scipio Police
Department and the State Police and the County Sheriff about the
squashed escape attempt, and probably asking for doctors and
ambulances.

Whereas the Japanese had been bamboozled and overwhelmed so quickly
that their telephone lines were cut and their radio was smashed before
they could get in touch with anyone.


There was a full moon that night, but its rays could not reach the
floor of the National Forest.


The Japanese were not hurt. The Jamaicans disarmed them and sent them
up the moonlit road to the head of the lake. They told them not to
stop running until they got all the way back to Tokyo.

Most of them had never seen Tokyo.

And they did not arrive at the head of the lake hollering bloody
murder and flagging down passing cars. They hid up there. If the
United States was against them, who could be for them?


I had no gun.

If a few convicts had broken out and were still at large, I thought,
and they came down into our ghost town, they would know me and think
well of me. I would give them whatever they wanted, food, money,
bandages, clothes, the Mercedes.

No matter what I gave them, I thought, since they were color-coded,
they would never escape from this valley, from this lily-white
cul-de-sac.

There was nothing but White people all the way to Rochester's
city-limits sign.


I went to my rowboat, which I had turned upside down for the
wintertime. I sat down astride its slick and glossy bow, which was
aimed at the old barge terminal of Scipio.

They still had lights over in Scipio, which was a nice boost for my
complacency.

There wasn't any excitement over there, despite the noise at the
prison. The lights in several houses went off. None went on. Only 1
car was moving. It was going slowly down Clinton Street. It stopped
and turned off its lights in the parking lot behind the Black Cat
Cafe.

The little red light atop the water tower on the summit of Musket
Mountain winked off and on, off and on. It became a sort of mantra for
me, so that I sank even deeper into thoughtless meditation, as though
scuba diving in lukewarm bouillon.


Off and on that little light winked, off and on, off and on.

How long did it give me rapture from so far away? Three minutes? Ten
minutes? Hard to say.

I was brought back to full wakefulness by a strange transformation in
the appearance of the frozen lake to the north of me. It had come
alive somehow, but noiselessly.

And then I realized that I was watching lOOs of men engaged in a sort
of project which I myself had planned and led many times in Vietnam,
which was a surprise attack.

It was I who broke the silence. A name tore itself from my lips before
I could stop it.

The name? "Muriel!"


35

Muriel Peck wasn't a barmaid anymore. She was a Full Professor of
English at Tarkington, making good use of her Swarthmore education.
She was asleep at the time of the surprise attack, all alone in
faculty housing, a vine-covered cottage at the top of Clinton Street.
Like me, she had sent her 2 kids to expensive boarding schools.

I asked her one time if she ever thought of marrying again. She said,
"Didn't you notice? I married you."


She wouldn't have gotten a job at Tarkington if the Trustees hadn't
fired me. An English teacher named Dwight Casey hated the head of his
department so much that he asked for my old job just to get away from
him. So that created a vacancy for Muriel.

If they hadn't fired me, she probably would have left this valley, and
would be alive today.

If they hadn't fired me, I would probably be lying where she is, next
to the stable, in the shadow of Musket Mountain when the Sun goes
down.

Dwight Casey is still alive, I think. His wife caine into a great deal
of money soon after he replaced me. He quit at the end of the academic
year and moved to the south of France.

His wife's family was big in the Mafia. She could have taught but
didn't. She had a Master's Degree in Political Science from Rutgers.
All he had was a BS in Hotel Management from Cornell.


The Battle of Scipio lasted 5 days. It lasted 2 days longer than the
Battle of Gettysburg, at which Elias Tarkington was shot by a
Confederate soldier who mistook him for Abraham Lincoln.

On the night of the prison break, I was as helpless a voyeur, once the
attack had begun, as Robert E. Lee at Gettysburg or Napoleon Bonaparte
at Waterloo.

There was 1 shot fired by someone in Scipio. I will never know who did
it. It was some night owl with a loaded gun in easy reach. Whoever did
it must have been killed soon afterward, otherwise he would have
bragged about what he had done so early in the game.


Those were good soldiers who crossed the ice. Several of them had been
in Vietnam, and so, like me, had had lessons in Military Science on
full scholarships from the Government. Others had had plenty of
experience with shooting and being shot at, often from early childhood
on, and so found a single shot unremarkable. They saved their
ammunition until they could see clearly what they were shooting at.

When those seasoned troops went ashore, that was when they commenced
firing. They were stingy with their bullets. There would be a bang,
and then silence for several minutes, and then, when another target
appeared, maybe a bleary-eyed householder coming out his front door or
peering out a window, with or without a weapon, there would be another
bang or 2 or 3 bangs, and then silence again. The escaped convicts, or
Freedom Fighters as they would soon call themselves, had to assume,
after all, that many if not most households had firearms, and that
their owners had long daydreamed of using them with deadly effect
should precisely what was happening happen. The Freedom Fighters had
no choice. I would have done the same thing, had I been in their
situation.

Bang. Somebody else would jerk backward and downward, like a
professional actor on a TV show.


The biggest flurry of shots came from what I guessed from afar to be
the parking lot in back of the Black Cat Cafe, where the prostitutes
parked their vans. The men who visited the vans that late at night had
handguns with them, just in case. Better safe than sorry.


And then I could tell from the sporadic firing that the Freedom
Fighters had begun to climb the hill to the college, which was
brightly lit all night every night to discourage anybody who might be
tempted to do harm up here. From my point of view across the lake,
larkington might have been mistaken for an emerald-studded Oz or City
of God or Camelot.


You can bet I did not go back to sleep that night. I listened and
listened for sirens, for helicopters, for the rumble of armored
vehicles, for proofs that the forces of law and order would soon put a
stop to the violence in the valley with even greater violence. At dawn
the valley was as quiet as ever, and the red light on top of the water
tower on the summit of Musket Mountain, as though nothing remarkable
had happened over there, winked off and on, off and on.


I went next door to the Warden's house. I woke up his 3 servants. They
had gone back to bed after the Warden charged up the hill in his
Isuzu. These were old, old men, sentenced to life in prison without
hope of parole, back when I was a little boy in Midland City. I hadn't
even learned to read and write, probably, when they ruined some lives,
or were accused of doing so, and were forced to lead lives not worth
living as a consequence.

That would certainly teach them a lesson.

At least they hadn't been put into that great invention by a dentist,
the electric chair.

"Where there is life there is hope." So says John Gay in the Atheist's
Bible. What a starry-eyed optimist!


These 3 old geezers hadn't had a visitor or a phone call or a letter
for decades. Under the circumstances, they had no vivid ideas of what
they would like to do next, so they were glad to take orders from
almost anybody. Other people's ideas of what to do next were like
brain transplants. All of a sudden they were full of pep.

So I had them drink a lot of black coffee. Since I was worried about
what might have happened to the Warden, they acted worried, too.
Otherwise, they wouldn't have. I did not tell them that there had been
a mass prison break and that Scipio had been overrun by criminals.
Such information would have been useless to them, would have been like
more TV. They were supposed to stay where they had been put, no matter
what in the real world might be going on.


Those 3 were what psychologists call "other-directed."


I took them over to my house and ordered them to keep the wood fire in
the fireplace going, and to feed Margaret and Mildred when they got
hungry. There were plenty of canned goods. I didn't have to worry
about the perishables in the refrigerator, since the air in the
kitchen was already so cold. The stove itself ran on bottled propane,
and there was a month's supply of that science fiction miracle.

Imagine that: bottled energy!


Margaret and Mildred, thank goodness, felt neutral about the Warden's
zombies, the same way they felt about me. They didn't like them, but
they didn't dislike them, either. So everything was falling into
place. They would still have a life-support system, even if I went
away for several days or got wounded or killed.

I didn't expect to get wounded or killed, except by accident. All the
combatants in Scipio would regard me as unthreatening, the Whites
because of my color-coding and the Blacks because they knew and liked
me.

The issues were clear. They were Black and White.


All the Yellow people had run away.


I had hoped to get away from the house while Margaret and Mildred were
fast asleep. But as I passed my boat on my way to the ice, an upstairs
window flew open. There my poor old wife was, a scrawny, addled hag.
She sensed that something important was happening, I think. Otherwise
she wouldn't have exposed herself to the cold and daylight. Her voice,
moreover, which had been rasping and bawdy for years, was liquid and
sweet, just as it had been on our Honeymoon. And she called me by
name. That was another thing she hadn't done for a long, long time.
This was disorienting.

"Gene¡X" she said.

So I stopped. "Yes, Margaret," I said.

"Where are you going, Gene?" she said.

"I'm going for a walk, Margaret, to get some fresh air," I said.

"You're going to see some woman, aren't you?" she said.

"No, Margaret. Word of Honor I'm not," I said.

"That's all right. I understand," she said.

It was so pathetic! I was so overwhelmed by the pathos, by the
beautiful voice I hadn't heard for so long, by the young Margaret
inside the witch! I cried out in all sincerity, "Oh, Margaret, I love
you, I love you!"

Those were the last words she would ever hear me say, for I would
never come back.

She made no reply. She shut the window and pulled down the opaque
black roller blind.

I have not seen her since.

After that side of the lake was recaptured by the 82nd Airborne, she
and her mother were put in a steel box on the back of one of the
prison vans and delivered to the insane asylum in Batavia. They will
be fine as long as they have each other. They might be fine even if
they didn't have each other. Who knows, until somebody or something
performs that particular experiment?

I have not been on that side of the lake since that morning, and may
never go there again, as close as it is. So I will probably never find
out what became of my old footlocker, the coffin containing the
soldier I used to be, and my very rare copy of Black Garterbelt.


I crossed the lake that morning, as it happens, never to return, to
deliver a particular message to the escaped convicts, with the idea of
saving lives and property. I knew that the students were on vacation.
That left nothing but social nobodies, in which category I surely
include the college faculty, members of the Servant Class.

To me this low-grade social mix was ominous. In Vietnam, and then in
later show-biz attacks on Tripoli and Panama City and so on, it had
been perfectly ordinary for our Air Force to blow communities of
nobodies, no matter whose side they were on, to Kingdom Come.

It seemed likely to me, should the Government decide to bomb Scipio,
that it would be sensible to bomb the prison, too.

And everything would be taken care of, and no argument.

Next problem?


How many Americans knew or cared anyway where or what the Mohiga
Valley was, or Laos or Cambodia or Tripoli? Thanks to our great
educational system and TV, half of them couldn't even find their own
country on a map of the world.


Three-quarters of them couldn't put the cap back on a bottle of
whiskey without crossing the threads.

As I expected, I was treated by Scipio's conquerors as a harmless old
fool with wisdom. The criminals called me "The Preacher" or "The
Professor," just as they had on the other side.

I saw that many. of them had tied ribbons around their upper arms as a
sort of uniform. So when I came across a man who wasn't wearing a
ribbon, I asked him jokingly, "Where's your uniform, Soldier?"

"Preacher," he said, referring to his skin, "I was born in a uniform."


Alton Darwin had set himself up in Tex Johnson's office in Samoza Hall
as President of a new nation. He had been drinking. I do not mean to
present any of these escapees as rational or capable of redemption.
They did not care if they lived or died. Alton Darwin was glad to see
me. Then again, he was glad about everything.

I had to advise him, nonetheless, that he could expect to be bombed
unless he and the rest of them got out of town right away. I said
their best chance to survive was to go back to the prison and fly
white flags everywhere. If they did that right away, they might claim
that they had nothing to do with all the killings here. The number of
people the escapees killed in Scipio, incidentally, was 5 less than
the number I myself had killed single-handedly in the war in Vietnam.

So the Battle of Scipio was nothing but a "tempest in a teapot," an
expression the Atheist's Bible tells us is proverbial.


I told Alton Darwin that if he and his people didn't want to be bombed
and didn't want to return to the prison, they should take whatever
food they could find and disperse to the north or west. I told him one
thing he already knew, that the floor of the National Forest to the
south and east was so dark and lifeless that anyone going in there
would probably starve to death or go mad before he found his way back
out of there. I told him another thing he already knew, that there
would soon be all these white people to the west and north, having the
times of their lives hunting escaped convicts instead of deer.

My second point, in fact, was something the convicts had taught me.
They all believed that the White people who insisted that it was their
Constitutional right to keep military weapons in their homes all
looked forward to the day when they could shoot Americans who didn't
have what they had, who didn't look like their friends and relatives,
in a sort of open-air shooting gallery we used to call in Vietnam a
"Free Fire Zone." You could shoot anything that moved, for the good of
the greater society, which was always someplace far away, like
Paradise.


Alton Darwin heard me out. And then he told me that he thought I was
right, that the prison probably would be bombed. But he guaranteed
that Scipio would not be bombed, and that it would not be attacked on
the ground, either, that the Government would have to keep its
distance and respect the demands he meant to put to it.

"What makes you think that?" I said.

"We have captured a TV celebrity," he said. "They won't let anything
happen to him. Too many people will be watching."

"Who?" I said.

And he said, "Jason Wilder."


That was the first I heard that they had taken hostage not only Wilder
but the whole Board of Trustees of Tarkington College. I now realize,
too, that Alton Darwin would not have known that Wilder was a TV
celebrity if old tapes of Wilder's talk show hadn't been run again and
again at the prison across the lake. Poor people of any race on the
outside never would have watched his show for long, since its basic
message was that it was poor people who were making the lives of the
rest of us so frightening.


36

"Star Wars," said Alton Darwin.

He was alluding to Ronald Reagan's dream of having scientists build an
invisible dome over this country, with electronics and lasers and so
on, which no enemy plane or projectile could ever penetrate. Darwin
believed that the social standing of his hostages was an invisible
dome over Scipio.

I think he was right, although I have not been able to discover how
seriously the Government considered bombing the whole valley back to
the Stone Age. Years ago, I might have found out through the Freedom
of Information Act. But the Supreme Court closed that peephole.


Darwin and his troops knew the lives of the hostages were valued
highly by the Government. They didn't know why, and I am not sure that
I do, either. I think that the number of people with money and power
had shrunk to the point where it felt like a family. For all the
escaped convicts knew about them, they might as well have been
aardvarks, or some other improbable animal they had never seen before.

Darwin regretted that I, too, was going to have to stay in Scipio. He
couldn't let me go, he said, because I knew too much about his
defenses. There were none as far as I could see, but he sounded as
though there were trenches and tank traps and mine fields all around
us.

Even more hallucinatory was his vision of the future. He was going to
restore this valley to its former economic vitality. It would become
an all-Black Utopia. All Whites would be resettled elsewhere.

He was going to put glass back into the windows of the factories, and
make their roofs weather-tight again. He would get the money to do
this and so many other wonderful things by selling the precious
hardwoods of the National Forest to the Japanese.


That much of his dream is actually coming true now. The National
Forest is now being logged by Mexican laborers using Japanese tools,
under the direction of Swedes. The proceeds are expected to pay half
of day-before-yesterday's interest on the National Debt.

That last is a joke of mine. I have no idea if any money for the
forest will go toward the National Debt, which, the last I heard, was
greater than the value of all property in the Western Hemisphere,
thanks to compound interest.


Alton Darwin looked me up and down, and then he said with typical
sociopathic impulsiveness, "Professor, I can't let you go because I
need you."

"What for?" I said. I was scared to death that he was going to make me
a General.

"To help with the plans," he said.

"For what?" I said.

"For the glorious future," he said. He told me to go to this library
and write out detailed plans for making this valley into the envy of
the World.

So that, in fact, is what I mainly did during most of the Battle of
Scipio.

It was too dangerous to go outside anyway, with all the bullets flying
around.


My best Utopian invention for the ideal Black Republic was "Freedom
Fighter Beer." They would get the old brewery going again, supposedly,
and make beer pretty much like any other beer, except that it would be
called Freedom Fighter Beer. If I say so myself, that is a magical
name for beer. I envisioned a time when, all over the world, the bored
and downtrodden and weary would be bucking themselves up at least a
little bit with Freedom Fighter Beer.


Beer, of course, is actually a depressant. But poor people will never
stop hoping otherwise.


Alton Darwin was dead before I could complete my long-range plan. His
dying words, as I've said, were, "See the Nigger fly the airplane."
But I showed it to the hostages.

"What is this supposed to mean?" said Jason Wilder.

"I want you to see what they've had me doing," I said. "You keep
talking as though I could turn you loose, if I wanted. I'm as much a
prisoner as you are."

He studied the prospectus, and then he said, "They actually expect to
get away with this?"

"No," I said. "They know this is their Alamo."

He arched his famous eyebrows in clownish disbelief. He has always
looked to me a lot like the incomparable comedian Stanley Laurel. "It
would never have occurred to me to compare the rabid chimpanzees who
hold us in durance vile with Davy Crockett and James Bowie and Tex
Johnson's great-great-grandfather," he said.

"I was just talking about hopeless situations," I said.

"I certainly hope so," he said.

I might have added, but didn't, that the martyrs at the Alamo had died
for the right to own Black slaves. They didn't want to be a part of
Mexico anymore because it was against the law in that country to own
slaves of any kind.

I don't think Wilder knew that. Not many people in this country do. I
certainly never heard that at the Academy. I wouldn't have known that
slavery was what the Alamo was all about if Professor Stern the
unicycist hadn't told me so.


No wonder there were so few Black tourists at the Alamo!


Units of the 82nd Airborne, fresh from the South Bronx, had by then
retaken the other side of the lake and herded the prisoners back
inside the walls. A big problem over there was that almost every
toilet in the prison had been smashed. Who knows why?

What was to be done with the huge quantities of excrement produced
hour after hour, day after day, by all these burdens on Society?

We still had plenty of toilets on this side of the lake, which is why
this place was made an auxiliary prison almost immediately. Time was
of the essence, as the lawyers say.


Imagine the same sort of thing happening on a huge rocket ship bound
for Betelgeuse.

37

On the last afternoon of the siege, National Guard units relieved the
Airborne troops across the lake. That night, undetected, the
paratroops took up positions behind Musket Mountain. Two hours before
the next dawn, they came quietly around either side of the mountain,
captured the stable, freed the hostages, and then took possession of
all of Scipio. They had to kill only 1 person, who was the guard
dozing outside the stable. They strangled him with a standard piece of
equipment. I had used one just like it in Vietnam. It was a meter of
piano wire with a wooden handle at either end.

So that was that.

The defenders were out of ammunition. There were hardly any defenders
left anyway. Maybe 10.


Again, I don't believe there would have been such delicate
microsurgery by the best ground troops available, if it hadn't been
for the social prominence of the Trustees.

They were helicoptered to Rochester, where they were shown on TV. They
thanked God and the Army. They said they had never lost hope. They
said they were tired but happy, and just wanted to get a hot bath and
then sleep in a nice clean bed.


All National Guardsmen who had been south of the Meadowdale Cinema
Complex during the siege got Combat Infantryman's Badges. They were so
pleased.

The paratroops already had theirs. When they dressed up for the
victory parade, they wore campaign ribbons from Costa Rica and Bimini
and El Paso and on and on, and from the Battle of the South Bronx, of
course. That battle had had to keep on going without their help.


Several nobodies tried to get onto a helicopter with the Trustees.
There was room. But the only people allowed aboard were on a list
which had come all the way from the White House. I saw the list. Tex
and Zuzu Johnson were the only locals named.

I watched the helicopters take off, the happy ending. I was up in the
belfry, checking on the damage. I hadn't dared to go up there earlier.
Somebody might have taken a shot at me, and it could have been a
beautiful shot.

And as the helicopters became specks to the north, I was startled to
hear a woman speak. She was right behind me. She was small and was
shod in white sneakers and had come up ever so quietly. I wasn't
expecting company.

She said, "I wondered what it was like up here. Sure is a mess, but
the view is nice, if you like water and soldiers." She sounded tired.
We all did.

I turned to look at her. She was Black. I don't mean she was so-called
Black. Her skin was very dark. She may not have had any white blood
whatsoever. If she had been a man at Athena, skin that color would
have put her in the lowest social caste.


She was so small and looked so young I mistook her for a Tarkington
student, maybe the dyslexic daughter of some overthrown Caribbean or
African dictator who had absquatulated to the USA with his starving
nation's treasury.

Wrong again!

If the college GRIOT~ had still been working, I am sure it couldn't
have guessed what she was and what she was doing there. She had lived
outside all the statistics on which GRJOTTM based its spookily canny
guesses. When GRIOT~ was stumped by somebody who had given statistical
expectations as wide a berth as she had, it just sat there and hummed.
A little red light came on.

Her name was Helen Dole. She was 26. She was unmarried. She was born
in South Korea, and had grown up in what was then West Berlin. She
held a Doctorate in Physics from the University of Berlin. Her father
had been a Master Sergeant in the Quartermaster Corps of the Regular
Army, serving in Korea and then in our Army of Occupation in Berlin.
When her father retired after 30 years, to a nice enough little house
in a nice enough little neighborhood in Cincinnati, and she saw the
horrible squalor and hopelessness into which most black people were
born there, she went back to what had become just plain Berlin and
earned her Doctorate.

She was as badly treated by many people over there as she would have
been over here, but at least she didn't have to think every day about
some nearby black ghetto where life expectancy was worse than that in
what was said to be the poorest country on the planet, which was
Bangladesh.


This Dr. Helen Dole had come to Scipio only the day before the prison
break, to be interviewed by Tex and the Trustees for, of all things,
my old job teaching Physics. She had seen the opening advertised in
The New York Times. She had talked to Tex on the telephone before she
came. She wanted to make sure he knew she was Black. Tex said that was
fine, no problem. He said that the fact that she was both female and
black, and held a Doctorate besides, was absolutely beautiful.

If she had landed the job and signed a contract before Tarkington
ceased to be, that would have made her the last of a long succession
of Tarkington Physics teachers, which included me.

But Dr. Dole had blown up at the Board of Trustees instead. They asked
her to promise that she would never, whether in class or on social
occasions, discuss politics or history or economics or sociology with
students. She was to leave those subjects to the college's experts in
those fields.

"I plain blew up," she said to me.


"All they asked of me," she said, "was that I not be a human being."

"I hope you gave it to them good," I said.

"I did," she said. "I called them a bunch of European planters."

Lowell Chung's mother was no longer on the Board, so all the faces Dr.
Dole saw were indeed of European ancestry.

She asserted that Europeans like them were robbers with guns who went
all over the world stealing other people's land, which they then
called their plantations. And they made the people they robbed their
slaves. She was taking a long view of history, of course. Tarkington's
Trustees certainly hadn't roamed the world on ships, armed to the
teeth and looking for lightly defended real estate. Her point was that
they were heirs to the property of such robbers, and to their mode of
thinking, even if they had been born poor and had only recently
dismantled an essential industry, or cleaned out a savings bank, or
earned big commissions by facilitating the sale of beloved American
institutions or landmarks to foreigners.


She told the Trustees, who had surely vacationed in the Caribbean,
about the Carib Indian chief who was about to be burned at the stake
by Spaniards. His crime was his failure to see the beauty of his
people's becoming slaves in their own country.

This chief was offered a cross to kiss before a professional soldier
or maybe a priest set fire to the kindling and logs piled up above his
kneecaps. He asked why he should kiss it, and he was told that the
kiss would get him into Paradise, where he would meet God and so on.

He asked if there were more people like the Spaniards up there.

He was told that of course there were.

In that case, he said, he would leave the cross unkissed. He said he
didn't want to go to yet another place where people were so cruel.


She told them about Indonesian women who threw their jewelry to Dutch
sailors coming ashore with firearms, in the hopes that they would be
satisfied by such easily won wealth and go away again.

But the Dutch wanted their land and labor, too.

And they got them, which they called a plantation.

I had heard about that from Damon Stern.


"Now," she said to them, "you are selling this plantation because the
soil is exhausted, and the natives are getting sicker and hungrier
every day, begging for food and medicine and shelter, all of which are
very expensive. The water mains are breaking. The bridges are falling
down. So you are taking all your money and getting out of here."

One Trustee, she didn't know which, except that it wasn't Wilder, said
that he intended to spend the rest of his life in the United States.

"Even if you stay," she said, "you and your money and your soul are
getting out of here."


So she and I, working independently, had noticed the same thing: That
even our natives, if they had reached the top or been born at the top,
regarded Americans as foreigners. That seems to have been true, too,
of people at the top in what used to be the Soviet Union: to them
their own ordinary people weren't the kinds of people they understood
and liked very much.

"What did Jason Wilder say to that?" I asked her. On TV he was always
so quick to snatch any idea tossed his way, cover it with spit, so to
speak, and throw it back with a crazy spin which made it uncatchable.

"He just let it lie there for a while," she said.

I could see how he might have been flummoxed by this little black
woman who spoke many more languages than he did, who knew I ,000 times
more science than he did, and at least as much history and literature
and music and art. He had never had anybody like that on his talk
show. He may never have had to debate with a person whose destiny
GRIOTTM would have described as unpredictable.

He said at last, "I am an American, not a European." And she said to
him, "Then why don't you act like one?"


38

Yes, and now the Japanese are pulling out. Their Army of Occupation in
Business Suits is going home. The prison break at Athena was the straw
that broke the camel's back, I think, but they were already abandoning
properties, simply walking away from them, before that expensive
catastrophe.

Why they ever wanted to own a country in such an advanced state of
physical and spiritual and intellectual dilapidation is a mystery.
Maybe they thought that would be a good way to get revenge for our
having dropped not 1 but 2 atomic bombs on them.

So that makes two groups so far who have given up on owning this
country of their own free will, mainly, I think, because so many
unhappy and increasingly lawless people of all races, who don't own
anything, turn out to come along with the properties.


It looks like they will keep Oahu as a sort of memento of their
empire's high-water mark, just as the British have kept Bermuda.

Speaking of unhappy poor people of all races, I have often wondered
how the Tarkington Board of Trustees would have been treated if Athena
had been a White prison instead of a Black one. I think Hispanic
convicts would have regarded them as the Blacks did, as aardvarks, as
exotic creatures who had nothing to do with life as they had
experienced it.

It seems to me that White convicts, though, might have wanted to kill
them or at least beat them up for not caring what became of them any
more than they cared what became of Blacks and Hispanics.


Dr. Dole went back to Berlin. At least that is where she said she was
going.

I asked her where she had hidden during the siege. She said she had
crawled into the firebox under an old boiler in the basement of this
library. It hadn't been used since before I taught here, but it would
have cost a lot of money to move. The school hated to spend money on
improvements that didn't show.


So during the siege she was only a few meters away from me while I sat
up here and engaged in the wonderful new science of Futurology.


Dr. Dole sure didn't think much of her own country. She ranted on
about its sky-high rates of murder and suicide and drug addiction and
infant mortality, its low rate of literacy, the fact that it had a
higher percentage of its citizens in prison than any other country
except for Haiti and South Africa, and didn't know how to manufacture
anything anymore, and put less money into research and primary
education than Japan or

Korea or any country in East or West Europe, and on and on.

"At least we still have freedom of speech," I said.

And she said, "That isn't something somebody else gives you. That's
something you have to give yourself."


Before I forget: During her job interview, she asked Jason Wilder
where he had gone to college.

He said, "Yale."

"You know what they ought to call that place?" she said.

"No," he said.

And she said, "Plantation Owners' Tech."


When she was living in Berlin, she told me, she had been appalled by
how ignorant so many American tourists and soldiers were of geography
and history, and the languages and customs of other countries. She
asked me, "What makes so many Americans proud of their ignorance? They
act as though their ignorance somehow made them charming."

I had been asked the same general question by Alton Darwin when I was
working at Athena. A World War II movie was being shown on all the TVs
over there. Frank Sinatra had been captured by the Germans, and he was
being interrogated by an SS Major who spoke English at least as well
as Sinatra, and who played the cello and painted watercolors in his
spare time, and who told Sinatra how much he looked forward to getting
back, when the war was over, to his first love, which was
lepidopterology.

Sinatra didn't know what lepidopterology was. It is the study of moths
and butterifies. That had to be explained to him.

And Alton Darwin asked me, "How come in all these movies the Germans
and the Japanese are always the smart ones, and the Americans are the
dumb ones, and still the Americans win the war?"


Darwin didn't feel personally involved. The American combat soldiers
in the movie were all White. That wasn't just White propaganda. That
happened to be historically accurate. During the Finale Rack, American
military units were segregated according to race. The feeling back
then was that Whites would feel like garbage if they had to share
quarters and dining facilities and so on with Blacks. That went for
civilian life, too. The Black people had their own schools, and they
were excluded from most hotels and restaurants and places of
entertainment, except onstage, and polling booths.

They were also strung up or burned alive or whatever from time to
time, as reminders that their place was at the very bottom of Society.
They were thought, when they were given soldier suits, to be lacking
in determination and initiative in battle. So they were employed
mostly as common laborers or truck drivers behind the Duke Waynes and
Frank Sinatras, who did the fearless stuff.

There was one all-Black fighter squadron. To the surprise of many it
did quite well.

See the Nigger fly the airplane?


To get back to Alton Darwin's question about why Frank Sinatra
deserved to win even though he didn't know anything: I said, "I think
he deserves to win because he is like Davy Crockett at the Alamo." The
Walt Disney movie about Davy Crockett had been shown over and over
again at the prison, so all the convicts knew who Davy Crockett was.
And one thing it might be good to bring out at my trial is that I
never told the convicts the Mexican General who besieged the Alamo was
trying and failing to do what Abraham Lincoln would later do
successfully, which was to hold his country together and outlaw
slavery.

"How is Sinatra like Davy Crockett?" Alton Darwin asked me.

And I said, "His heart is pure."


Yes, and there is more of my story to tell. But I have just received a
piece of news from my lawyer that has knocked the wind out of me.
After Vietnam, I thought there was nothing that could ever hit me that
hard again. I thought I was used to dead bodies, no matter whose.

Wrong again.

Ah me!

If! tell now who it is that died, and how that person died, died only
yesterday, that will seem to complete my story. From a reader's point
of view, there would be nothing more to say but this:


THE END




But there is more I want to tell. So I will carry on as though I
hadn't heard the news, albeit doggedly. And I write this:

The Lieutenant Colonel who led the assault on Scipio and then kept
locals off the helicopters was also a graduate of the Academy, but
maybe 2 score and 7 years younger than myself. When I told him my name
and he saw my class ring, he realized who I was and what I used to be.
He exclaimed, "My Lord, it's the Preacher!"

If it hadn't been for him, I don't know what would have become of me.
I guess I would have done what most of the other valley people did,
which was to go to Rochester or Buffalo or beyond, looking for any
kind of work, minimum wage for sure. The whole area south of the
Meadowdale Cinema Complex was and still is under Martial Law.

His name was Harley Wheelock III. He told me he and his wife were
infertile, so they adopted twin girl orphans from Peru, South America,
not Peru, Indiana. They were cute little Inca girls. But he hardly
ever got home anymore, his Division was so busy. He was all set to go
home on leave from the South Bronx when he was ordered here to put
down the prison break and rescue the hostages.


His father Harley Wheelock II was 3 years ahead of me at the Academy,
and died, I already knew, in some kind of accident in Germany, and so
never served in Vietnam. I asked Harley III how exactly Harley II had
died. He told me his father drowned while trying to rescue a Swedish
woman who committed suicide by opening the windows of her Volvo and
driving it off a dock and into the Ruhr River at Essen, home, as it
happens, of that premier manufacturer of crematoria, A. J. Topf und
Sohn.

Small World.


Now Harley III said to me, "You know anything about this excrement
hole?" Of course, he himself didn't say "excrement." He had never
heard of the Mohiga Valley before he was ordered here. Like most
people, he had heard of Athena and Tarkington but had no clear idea
where they were.

I replied that the excrement hole was home to me, although I had been
born in Delaware and raised in Ohio, and that I expected 1 day to be
buried here.

"Where's the Mayor?" he said.

"Dead," I said, "and all the policemen, too, including the campus
cops. And the Fire Chief."

"So there isn't any Government?" he said.

"I'd say you're the Government," I said.

He used the Name of Our Savior as an explosive expletive, and then
added, "Wherever I go, all of a sudden I am the Government. I'm
already the Government in the South Bronx, and I've got to get back
there as quick as I can. So I hereby declare you the Mayor of this
excrement hole." This time he actually said, "excrement hole," echoing
me. "Go down to the City Hall, wherever that is, and start governing."

He was so decisive! He was so loud!

As though the conversation weren't weird enough, he was wearing one of
those coal-scuttle helmets the Army started issuing after we lost the
Vietnam War, maybe to change our luck.

Make Blacks, Jews, and everybody else look like Nazis, and see how
that worked out.


"I can't govern," I protested. "Nobody would pay any attention to me.
I would be a joke."

"Good point!" he cried. So loud!

He got the Governor's Office in Albany on the radio. The Governor
himself was on his way to Rochester by helicopter, in order to go on
TV with the freed hostages. The Governor's Office managed to patch
through Harley III's call to the Governor up in the sky. Harley III
told the Governor who I was and what the situation was in Scipio.

It didn't take long.

And then Harley III turned to me and said, "Congratulations! You are
now a Brigadier General in the National Guard!"


"I've got a family on the other side of the lake," I said. "I've got
to go find out how they are."

He was able to tell me how they were. He personally, the day before,
had seen Margaret and Mildred loaded into the steel box on the back of
a prison van, consigned to the Laughing Academy in Batavia.

"They're fine!" he said. "Your country needs you more than they do
now, so, General Hartke, strut your stuff!"


He was so full of energy! It was almost as though his coal-scuttle
helmet contained a thunderstorm.

Never an idle moment! No sooner had he persuaded the Governor to make
me a Brigadier than he was off to the stable, where captured Freedom
Fighters were being forced to dig graves for all the bodies. The weary
diggers had every reason to believe that they were digging their own
graves. They had seen plenty of movies about the Finale Rack, in which
soldiers in coal-scuttle helmets stood around while people in rags dug
their own final resting places.

I heard Harley III barking orders at the diggers, telling them to dig
deeper and make the sides straighter and so on. I had seen leadership
of such a high order exercised in Vietnam, and I myself had exhibited
it from time to time, so I am quite certain that Harley III had taken
some sort of amphetamine.

There wasn't much for me to govern at first. This place, which had
been the sole remaining business of any size in the valley, stood
vacant and seemed likely to remain so. Most locals had managed to run
away after the prison break. When they came back, though, there was no
way to make a living. Those who owned houses or places of business
couldn't find anybody to sell them to. They were wiped out.

So most of the civilians I might have governed had soon packed the
best of their belongings into cars and trailers, and paid small
fortunes to black marketeers for enough gasoline to get them the heck
out of here.


I had no troops of my own. Those on my side of the lake were on loan
from the commander of the National Guard Division, the 42nd Division,
the "Rainbow Division," Lucas Florio. He had his headquarters in
Hiroshi Matsumoto's old office at the prison. He wasn't a graduate of
West Point, and he was too young to have fought in Vietnam, and his
home was in Schenectady, so we had never met before. His troops were
all White, with Orientals classified as Honorary White People. The
same was true of the 82nd Airborne. There were also Black and Hispanic
units somewhere, the theory being, as with the prisons, that people
were always more comfortable with those of their own race.

This resegregation, although I never heard any public figure say so,
also made the Armed Forces more like a set of golf clubs. You could
use this battalion or that one, depending on what color people they
were supposed to fight.

The Soviet Union, of course, with its citizenry, including every sort
of a human being but a Black or

Hispanic, found out the hard way that soldiers wouldn't fight hard at
all against people who looked and thought and talked like them.


The Rainbow Division itself began during World War I, as an experiment
integrating unlike Americans who weren't Army Regulars. Reserve
Divisions activated back then were all identified with specific parts
of the country. Then somebody got the idea of putting together a
Division composed of draftees and volunteers from all different parts
of the country, to prove how well they could get along.

Harmony between White people thought not to like each other very much
was what the rainbow represented then. The Rainbow Division did in
fact fight about as well as any other one during the War to End Wars,
the prelude to the Finale Rack.


Afterward, the experiment complete, the 42nd Division became merely
one more National Guard outfit, arbitrarily handed over with its
battle ribbons to New York State.

But the symbol of the rainbow lives on in its shoulder patch.

Before I was arrested for insurrection, I myself was a wearer of that
rainbow, along with the star of a Brigadier!

39

During my first 2 weeks as Military Commander of the Scipio District,
all the way to the head of the lake and all the way down to the
National Forest, the best thing I did, I think, was to make some of
the soldiers firemen. A few had been firemen in civilian life, so I
got them to familiarize themselves with the town's firefighting
apparatus, which hadn't been hurt during the siege. One real stroke of
luck: the fire trucks all had full tanks of gasoline. You would have
thought, in a society where everybody from top to bottom was stealing
everything that wasn't nailed down, that somebody would have siphoned
off that priceless gasoline.

Every so often, in the midst of chaos, you come across an amazing,
inexplicable instance of civic responsibility. Maybe the last shred of
faith people have is in their firemen.


I also supervised the exhumation of the bodies next to the stable.
They had been buried for only a few days, but then the Government,
personified by a Coroner and the Medical Examiner from the State
Police who knew so much about crucifixions, ordered us to dig them up
again. The Government had to fingerprint and photograph them, and
describe their dental work, if any, and their obvious wounds, if any,
and so on. We didn't have to dig up the Shultzes again, who had
already been dug up once, to make room for the Pavilion.

And we hadn't found the young woman's skull yet. The digging hadn't
gone deep enough yet to find out what had become of the head of the
missing Lilac Queen.


The Government, just those 2 guys from out of town, said we had to
bury the bodies much deeper when they were through with them. That was
the law.

"We wouldn't want to break the law," I said.

The Coroner was black. I wouldn't have known he was Black if he hadn't
told me.

I asked him if he couldn't arrange for the County or the State or
somebody to take possession of the bodies until the next-of-kin, if
any, could decide what was to be done with them. I hoped they would be
taken to Rochester, where they could be embalmed or refrigerated or
cremated, or at least buried in decent containers of some kind. They
had been buried here in nothing but their clothing.

He said he would look into it, but that I shouldn't get my hopes up.
He said the County was broke and the State was broke and the Country
was broke and that he was broke. He had lost what little he had in
Microsecond Arbitrage.


After the Government left, I faced the problem of what the best way
would be to dig much deeper graves. I was reluctant to ask National
Guardsmen to do it with shovels. They had been resentful when 1 had
them dig up the bodies and were growing more sullen in any case as it
became more and more apparent, even that early in the game, that they
might never be allowed to return to civilian life. The glamour of
their Combat Infantryman's Badges was wearing thin.

I couldn't use convict labor from across the lake. That, too, was the
law. And then I remembered that the college had a backhoe which ran on
diesel fuel, which wasn't a hot item on the black market. So if
somebody could find the backhoe, there might still be some fuel in its
tank.

A soldier found it, and the tank was full!

Miracle!

Again I ask the question: "How much longer can I go on being an
Atheist?"


The tank was full because there was only one diesel automobile in
Scipio when the diaspora began. It was a Cadillac General Motors put
on the market about the time we got kicked out of Vietnam. It is still
here. It was such a lemon that you might as well have tried to go on a
Sunday spin in an Egyptian pyramid.

It used to belong to a Tarkington parent. He was coming to his
daughter's graduation when it broke down in front of the Black Cat
Cafe. It had already stopped of its own accord many times between here
and New York City. So he went to the hardware store and bought yellow
paint and a brush and painted big lemons all over it, and sold it to
Lyle Hooper for a dollar.

This was a man who was on the Board of Directors of General Motors!


During the brief time the bodies were all aboveground again, a person
showed up with a Toyota hearse and an undertaker from Rochester to
claim 1. That was Dr. Charlton Hooper, who had been invited to try out
for the New York Knickerbockers basketball team but had chosen to
become a Physicist instead. As I've said, he was 2 meters tall.

That's tall!

I asked the undertaker where he had found the gasoline for the trip.

He wouldn't tell me at first, but I kept after him. He finally said,
"Try the crematorium in back of the Meadowdale Cinema Complex. Ask for
Guido."


I asked Charlton if he had come all the way from Waxahachie, Texas.
The last I'd heard, he was running experiments with the enormous
atom-smasher, the Supercoffider, down there. He said the funds for the
Supercoffider had dried up, so he had moved to Geneva, New York, not
that far away. He was teaching Freshman Physics at Hobart College.

I asked him if there was any way the Supercoffider could be turned
into a prison.

He said he guessed they could put a bunch of bad guys in there, and
throw the switch, and make their hair stand on end and raise their
temperatures a couple of degrees centigrade.


About a week after Charlton took his father's body away and we
reburied all the others to a legal depth with the backhoe, I was
awakened 1 afternoon by a terrible uproar in what had been such a
peaceful town. I was living down in the Town Hall back then, and often
took naps in the afternoon.

The noise was coming from up here. Chain saws were snarling. There was
hammering. It sounded like an army. As far as I knew, there were
supposed to be only 4 Guardsmen up here, keeping a fire watch.

The soldier who was stationed in my reception room, to wake me up in
case there was something important for me to do, had vanished. He had
gone up the hill to discover what on Earth was happening. There had
been no warning of any special activity.

So I trudged up Clinton Street all alone. I was wearing civilian shoes
and a camouflage suit General Florio had given me, along with 1 of his
own stars on each shoulder. That was all I had for a uniform.

When I got to the top of Clinton Street, I found General Florio
directing soldiers brought over from his side of the lake. They were
turning the Quadrangle into a city of tents. Others constructed a
barbed-wire fence around it.

I did not have to ask the meaning of all this. It was obvious that
Tarkington College, which had stayed small as the prison across the
lake had grown and grown, was itself a prison now.

General Florio turned to me and smiled. "Hello, Warden Hartke," he
said.


Once all those 10-man tents, which were brought down from the Armory
across the highway from the Meadowdale Cinema Complex, were set up on
the Quadrangle as though on a checkerboard, it seemed so logical. The
surrounding buildings, Samoza Hall, this library, the bookstore, the
Pavilion, and so on, with machine-gunners at various windows and
doorways, and with barbed wire between them and the tents, served well
enough as prison walls.

General Florio said to me, "Company's coming."

I remember a lecture Damon Stern gave about his visit with several
Tarkington students to Auschwitz, the infamous Nazi extermination camp
in Poland during the Finale Rack. Stern used to make extra money
taking trips to Europe with students whose parents or guardians didn't
want to see them over Christmas or during the summertime. He caught a
lot of heck for taking some to Auschwitz. He did it impulsively and
without asking permission from anyone. It wasn't on the schedule, and
some of the students were very upset afterward.

He said in his lecture that if the fences and gallows and gas chambers
were removed from the tidy, tidy checkerboard of streets and old
stucco two-story shotgun buildings, it might have made a nice enough
junior college for low-income or underachieving people in the area.
The buildings had been put up years before World War I, he said, as a
comfortable outpost for soldiers of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. Among
the many titles of that Emperor, he said, was Duke of Auschwitz.


What General Florio was after on our side of the lake was our sanitary
facilities. The prisoners were to use buckets in their tents for
toilets, but then these could be emptied into toilets in the
surrounding buildings and flushed from there into Scipio's
state-of-the-art sewage-disposal plant. Across the lake they were
having to bury everything.

And no showers.

We had plenty of showers.

One touching rather than horrible thing about the siege, surely, was
how little damage the escaped convicts did to this campus. It was as
though they really believed that it was going to be theirs for
generations.

This brings to mind another of Damon Stern's lectures, which was about
how the brutalized and starving poor people of Petrograd in Russia
behaved after they broke into the palace of the Czars in 1917. They
got to see for the first time all the treasures inside the palace, and
they were so outraged they wanted to wreck them.

But then one man got their attention by firing a gun at the ceiling,
and he said, "Comrades! Comrades! This is all ours now! Don't hurt
anything!"


They renamed Petrograd "Leningrad." Now it's Petrograd again.


In a way, the escaped convicts were like a neutron bomb. They had no
compassion for living things, but they did surprisingly little damage
to property.

Damon Stern the unicyclist, on the other hand, laid down his life for
living things. They weren't even human beings. They were horses. They
weren't even his horses.

His wife and kids got away, and, last I heard, were living in
Lackawanna, where they have relatives. That's nice when people have
relatives they can run away to.

But Damon Stern is buried deep and close to where he fell, next to the
stable, in the shadow of Musket Mountain when the Sun goes down.


His wife Wanda June came back here after the siege in a pickup truck
she said belonged to her half brother. She paid a fortune for enough
gas to get here from Lackawanna. I asked her what she was doing for
money, and she said she and Damon had put away a lot of Yen in their
freezer in a box marked "Brussels sprouts."

Damon woke her up in the middle of the night and told her to get into
the Volkswagen with the kids and take off for Rochester with the
headlights off. He had heard the explosion across the lake, and seen
the silent army crossing the ice to Scipio. The last thing he ever did
with Wanda June was hand her the box marked "Brussels sprouts."


Damon himself, over his wife's objections, stayed be-hind to spread
the alarm. He said he would be along later, by hitching a ride in
somebody else's car, or by walking all the way to Rochester on back
roads he knew, if he had to. It isn't clear what happened after that.
He probably called the local police, although none of them lived to
say so. He woke up a lot of people in the immediate neighborhood.

The best conjecture is that he heard gunfire inside the stable and
unwisely went to investigate. A Freedom Fighter with an AK-47 was
gut-shooting horses for the fun of it. He didn't shoot them in the
head.

Damon must have asked him to stop, so the Freedom Fighter shot him,
too.


His wife didn't want his body. She said the happiest years of his life
had been spent here, so he should stay buried here.

She found all 4 of the family unicycles. That was easy. The soldiers
were taking turns trying to ride them. Before that, several of the
convicts had also tried to ride them, so far as I know with no
success.


So I went back down Clinton Street to the Town Hall, to ponder this
latest change in my career, that I was next to be a Warden.

There was a Rolls-Royce Corniche, a convertible coupe, parked out
front. Whoever had a car like that had enough Yen or Marks or some
other stable currency to buy himself or herself enough black-market
gas for a trip from anywhere to anywhere.

My guess was that it was the chariot of some Tarkington student or
parent who hoped to recover property left in a dorm suite at the start
of the vacation period, a vacation which now, obviously, might never
end.

The soldier who was supposed to be my receptionist was back on duty.
He had returned to his post after General Florio told him to stop
standing around with his thumb in his anus and start stringing barbed
wire or erecting tents. He was waiting for me at the front door, and
he told me I had a visitor.

So I asked him, "Who is the visitor?"

He said, "It's your son, sir."

I was thunderstruck. "Eugene is here?" I said. Eugene Jr. had told me
that he never wanted to see me again as long as he lived. How is that
for a life sentence? And he was driving a Rolls-Royce now? Eugene?

"No, sir," he said. "Not Eugene."

"Eugene is the only son I have," I said. "What did he say his name
was?"

"He told me, sir," he said, "that he was your son Rob Roy."


That was all the proof I needed that a son of mine did indeed await me
in my office: that name, "Rob Roy." "Rob" and "Roy," and I was back in
the Philippine Islands again, having just been kicked out of Vietnam.
I was back in bed with a voluptuous female war correspondent from The
Des Moines Register, whose lips were like sofa pillows, telling her
that, if I had been a fighter plane, I would have had little pictures
of people painted all over me.

I calculated how old he was. He was 23, making him the youngest of my
children. He was the baby of the family.

He was in the reception room outside my office. He stood up when I
came in. He was exactly as tall as myself. His hair was the same color
and texture as mine. He needed a shave, and his potential beard was as
black and thick as mine. His eyes were the same color as mine. All 4
of our eyes were greenish amber. We had the same big nose, my father's
nose. He was nervous and polite. He was expensively dressed in leisure
clothes. If he had been learning-disabled or merely stupid, which he
wasn't, he might have had a happy 4 years at Tarkington, especially
with that car of his.

I was giddy. I had taken off my overcoat on the way in, so that he
could see my General's stars. That was something, anyway. How many
boys had a father who was a General?

"How can I help you?" I said.

"I hardly know how to begin," he said.

"I think you've already begun by telling the guard that you were a son
of mine," I said. "Was that a joke?"

"Do you think it was a joke?" he asked.

"I don't pretend I was a Saint when I was young and away from home so
much," I said. "But I never made love using an alias. I was always
easy to find afterward, if somebody wanted to find me badly enough.
So, if I did father a child out of wedlock somewhere along the line,
that comes as a complete surprise to me. I would have thought the
mother, the minute she found out she was pregnant, would have gotten
in touch with me."

"I know 1 mother who didn't," he said.

Before I could reply, he blurted words he must have rehearsed en
route. "This is going to be a very brief visit," he said. "I am going
to be in and out of here before you know it. I'm on my way to Italy,
and I never want to see this country ever again, and especially
Dubuque."

It would turn out that he had been through an ordeal that lasted much,
much longer than the siege of Scipio, and was probably harder on him
than Vietnam had been on me. He had been tried for child molestation
in Dubuque, Iowa, where he had founded and run a free child-care
center at his own expense.

He wasn't married, a strike against him in the eyes of most juries, a
character flaw like having served in the Vietnam War.


"I grew up in Dubuque," he would tell me, "and the money I inherited
was made in Dubuque." It was a meat-packing fortune.

"I wanted to give something back to Dubuque. With so many single
parents raising children on minimum wage, and with so many married
couples both working to make enough to feed and clothe their children
halfway decently, I thought what Dubuque needed most was a child-care
center that was nice and didn't cost anything."

Two weeks after he opened the center, he was arrested for child
molestation because several of the children came home with inflamed
genitalia.


He was later to prove in court, after smears were taken from the
children's lesions, that a fungus was to blame. The fungus was closely
related to jock itch, and may actually have been a new strain of jock
which had learned how to rise above all the standard remedies for that
affliction.

By then, though, he had been held in jail without bail for 3 months,
and had to be protected from a lynch mob by the National Guard.
Luckily for him, Dubuque, like so many communities, had backed up its
police with Armor and Infantry.

After he was acquitted, he had to be transported out of town and deep
into Illinois in a buttoned-up tank, or somebody would have killed
him.


The judge who acquitted him was killed. He was of Italian ancestry.
Somebody sent him a pipe bomb concealed in a huge salami.


But that son of mine did not tell me about any of that until just
before he said, "It's time to say, 'Good-bye.'" He prefaced the tale
of how he had suffered so with these words: "I hope you understand,
the last thing I wanted to do was make any demands on your emotions."

"Try me," I said.


Thinking about our meeting now ifils me with a sort of sweetness. He
had liked me enough, found me warm enough, to use me as though I were
a really good father, if only for a little while.


In the beginning, when we were feeling each other out very gingerly,
and I hadn't yet admitted that he was my son, I asked him if "Rob Roy"
was the name on his birth certificate, or whether that was a nickname
his mother had hung on him.

He said it was the name on his birth certificate.

"And the father on the birth certificate?" I asked.

"It was the name of a soldier who died in Vietnam," he said.

"Do you remember what it was?" I said.

Here came a surprise. It was the name of my brotherin-law, Jack
Patton, whom his mother had never met,

I'm sure. I must have told her about Jack in Manila, and she'd
remembered his name, and that he was unmarried and had died for his
country.

I thought to myself, "Good old Jack, wherever you are, it's time to
laugh like hell again."


"So what makes you think I'm your father instead of him?" I said.
"Your mother finally told you?"

"She wrote me a letter," he said.

"She didn't tell you face to face?" I said.

"She couldn't," he said. "She died of cancer of the pancreas when I
was 4 years old."

That was a shock. She sure hadn't lasted long after I made love to
her. I've always enjoyed thinking of the women I have made love to as
living on and on. I had imagined his mother, game and smart and sporty
and funny, with lips like sofa pillows, living on and on.

"She wrote me a letter on her deathbed," he continued, "which was put
into the hands of a law firm in Dubuque, not to be opened until after
the death of the good man who had married her and adopted me. He died
only a year ago."


"Did the letter say why you were named Rob Roy?" I inquired.

"No," he said. "I assumed it must be because she liked the novel by
that name by Sir Walter Scott."

"That sounds right," I said. What good would it do him or anybody else
to know that he was named for 2 shots of Scotch, I shot of sweet
vermouth, cracked ice, and a twist of lemon peel?


"How did you find me?" I said.

"At first I didn't think I wanted to find you," he said. "But then 2
weeks ago I thought that we were entitled to see each other once, at
least. So I called West Point."

"I haven't had any contact with them for years," I said.

"That's what they told me," he said. "But just before I called they
got a call from theGovernor of New York, who said he had just made you
a Brigadier General. He wanted to make sure he hadn't been made a fool
of. He wanted to make sure you were what you were claimed to be."


"Well," I said, and we were still standing in the reception room, "I
don't think we need to wait for blood tests to find out whether you
are really my son or not. You are the spit and image of me when I was
your age.

"You should know that I really loved your mother," I went on.

"That was in her letter, how much in love you were," he said.

"You will have to take my word for it," I said, "that if I had known
she was pregnant, I would have behaved honorably. I'm not quite sure
what we would have done. We would have worked something out."

I led the way into my office. "Come on in. There are a couple of easy
chairs in here. We can close the door."

"No, no, no," he said. "I'm on my way. Ijust thought we should see
each other just one time. We've done that now. It's no big thing."

"I like life to be simple," I said, "but if you went away without
another word, that would be much too simple for me, and for you, too,
I hope."

So I got him into my office and closed the door, and got us settled in
facing easy chairs. We hadn't touched. We never would touch.

"I would offer you coffee," I said, "but nobody in this valley has
coffee."

"I've got some in my car," he said.

"I'm sure," I said. "But don't go get it. Never mind, never mind." I
cleared my throat. "If you'll pardon my saying so, you seem to be what
I have heard called 'fabulously well-to-do.'"

He said that, yes, he was fortunate financially. The Dubuque meat
packer who married his mother and adopted him had sold his business to
the Shah of Bratpuhr shortly before he died, and had been paid in gold
bricks deposited in a bank in Switzerland.


The meat packer's name was Lowell Fenstermaker, so my son's full name
was Rob Roy Fenstermaker. Rob Roy said he certainly wasn't going to
change his last name to Hartke, that he felt like Fenstermaker and not
Hartke.

His stepfather had been very good to him. Rob Roy said that the only
thing he didn't like about him was the way he raised calves for veal.
The baby animals, scarcely out of the womb, were put in cages so
cramped that they could hardly move, to make their muscles nice and
tender. When they were big enough their throats were cut, and they had
never run or jumped or made friends, or done anything that might have
made life a worthwhile experience.


What was their crime?


Rob Roy said that his inherited wealth was at first an embarrassment.
He said that until very recently he never would have considered buying
a car like the 1 parked outside, or wearing a cashmere jacket and
lizard-skin shoes made in Italy. That was what he was wearing in my
office. "When nobody else in Dubuque could afford black-market coffee
and gasoline, I, too, did without. I used to walk everywhere."

"What happened very recently?" I said.

"I was arrested for molesting little children," he said. I itched all
over with a sudden attack of psychosomatic hives.

He told me the whole story.

I said to him, "I thank you for sharing that with me."


The hives went away as quickly as they had come.

I felt wonderful, very happy to have him look me over and think what
he would. I had seldom been happy to have my legitimate children look
me over and think what they would.

What made the difference? I hate to say so, because my answer is so
paltry. But here it is: I had always wanted to be a General, and there
I was wearing General's stars.


How embarrassing to be human.


There was this, too: I was no longer encumbered by my wife and
mother-in-law. Why did I keep them at home so long, even though it was
plain that they were making the lives of my children unbearable?

It could be, I suppose, because somewhere in the back of my mind I
believed that there might really be a big book in which all things
were written, and that I wanted some impressive proof that I could be
compassionate recorded there.


I asked Rob Roy where he had gone to college.

"Yale," he said.

I told him what Helen Dole said about Yale, that it ought to be called
"Plantation Owners' Tech."

"I don't get it," he said.

"I had to ask her to explain it myself," I said. "She said Yale was
where plantation owners learned how to get the natives to kill each
other instead of them."

"That's a bit strong," he said. And then he asked me if my first wife
was still alive.

"I've only had 1," I said. "She's still alive."

"There was a lot about her in Mother's letter," he said.

"Really?" I said. "Like what?"

"About how she was hit by a car the day before you were going to take
her to the senior prom. About how she was paralyzed from the waist
down, but you still married her, even though she would have to spend
the rest of her life in a wheelchair."

If that was in the letter, I must have told his mother that.


"And your father, is he still alive?" he said.

"No," I said. "The ceiling of a gift shop fell on him at Niagara
Falls."

"Did he ever regain his eyesight?" he said.

"Regain his what?" I said. And then I realized that his question was
based on some other lie I had told his mother.

"His eyesight," he said.

"No," I said. "Never did."

"I think it's so beautiful," he said, "how he came home from the war
blind, and you used to read Shakespeare to him."

"He sure loved Shakespeare," I said.

"So," he said, "I am descended not just from I war hero, but 2."

"War hero?" I said.

"I know you would never call yourself that," he said.

"But that's what Mother said you were. And you can certainly call your
father that. How many Americans shot down 28 German planes in World
War II?"

"We could go up to the library and look it up," I said. "They have a
very good library here. You can find out anything, if you really try."


"Where is my Uncle Bob buried?" he said.

"Your what?" I said.

"Your brother Bob, my Uncle Bob," he said.

I had never had a brother of any kind. I took a wild guess. "We threw
his ashes out of an airplane," I said.

"You have certainly had some bad luck," he said. "Your father comes
home blind from the war. Your childhood sweetheart is hit by a car
right before the senior prom. Your brother dies of spinal meningitis
right after he is invited to try out for the New York Yankees."

"Yes, well, all you can do is play the cards they deal you," I said.


"Have you still got his glove?" he said.

"No," I said. What kind of glove could I have told his mother about
when we were both sozzled on Sweet Rob Roys in Manila 24 years ago?

"You carried it all the way through the war, but now it's gone?" he
said.

He had to be talking about the nonexistent baseball glove of my
nonexistent brother. "Somebody stole it from me after I got home," I
said, "thinking it was just another baseball glove, I'm sure. Whoever
stole it had no idea how much it meant to me."

He stood. "I really must be going now."

I stood, too.

I shook my head sadly. "It isn't going to be as easy as you think to
give up on the country of your birth."

"That's about as meaningful as my astrological sign," he said.

"What is?" I said.

"The country of my birth," he said.

"You might be surprised," I said.

"Well, Dad," he said, "it certainly won't be the first time."


"Can you tell me who in this valley might have gasoline?" he said.
"I'll pay anything."

"Do you have enough gas to make it back to Rochester?" I said.

"Yes," he said.

"Well," I said, "head back the way you came. That's the only way you
can get back, so you can't get lost. Right at the Rochester city
limits you will see the Meadowdale Cinema Complex. Behind that is a
crematorium. Don't look for smoke. It's smokeless."

"A crematorium?" he said.

"That's right, a crematorium," I said. "You drive up to the
crematorium, and you ask for Guido. From what I hear, if you've got
the money, he's got the gasoline."

"And chocolate bars, do you think?" he said.

"I don't know," I said. "Won't hurt to ask."

40

Not that there is any shortage of real child-molesters,
child-shooters, child-starvers, child-bombers, childdrowners,
child-whippers, child-burners, and childdefenestrators on this happy
planet. Turn on the TV. By the luck of the draw, though, my son Rob
Roy Fenstermaker does not happen to be one of them.


OK.	My story is almost ended.

And here is the news that knocked the wind out of me so recently. When
I heard it from my lawyer, I actually said, "Ooof!"

Hiroshi Matsumoto was dead by his own hand in his hometown of
Hiroshima! But why would I care so much?


He did it in the wee hours of the morning, Japanese time, of course,
while sitting in his motor-driven wheelchair at the base of the
monument marking the point of impact of the atomic bomb that was
dropped on Hiroshima when we were little boys.

He didn't use a gun or poison. He committed harakin with a knife,
disemboweling himself in a ritual of self-loathing once practiced by
humiliated members of the ancient caste of professional soldiers, the
samurai.

And yet, so far as I am able to determine, he never shirked his duty,
never stole anything, and never killed or wounded anyone.

Still waters run deep. R.I.P.


If there really is a big book somewhere, in which all things are
written, and which is to be read line by line, omitting nothing, on
Judgment Day, let it be recorded that I, when Warden of this place,
moved the convicted felons out of the tents on the Quadrangle and into
the surrounding buildings. They no longer had to excrete in buckets
or, in the middle of the night, have their homes blown down. The
buildings, except for this I, were divided into cement-block cells
intended for 2 men, but most holding 5.

The War on Drugs goes on.

I caused 2 more fences to be erected, 1 within the other, enclosing
the back of the inner buildings, and with antipersonnel mines sown in
between. The machine-gun nests were reinstalled in windows and
doorways of the next ring of buildings, Norman Rockwell Hall, the
Pahlavi Pavilion, and so on.

It was during my administration that the troops here were Federalized,
a step I had recommended. That meant that they were no longer
civilians in soldier suits. That meant that they were full-time
soldiers, serving at the pleasure of the President. Nobody could say
how much longer the War on Drugs might last. Nobody could say when
they could go home again.

General Florio himself, accompanied by six MPs with clubs and
sidearms, congratulated me on all I had done. He then took back the
two stars he had loaned me, and told me that I was under arrest for
the crime of insurrection. I had come to like him, and I think he had
come to like me. He was simply following orders.

I asked him, as 1 comrade to another, "Does this make any sense to
you? Why is this happening?"

It is a question I have asked myself many times since, maybe 5 times
today between coughing fits.

His answer to it, the first answer I ever got to it, is probably the
best answer I will ever get to it.

"Some ambitious young Prosecutor," he said, "thinks you'll make good
TV."


Hiroshi Matsumoto's suicide has hit me so hard, I think, because he
was innocent of even the littlest misdemeanors. I doubt that he ever
double-parked, even, or ran a red light when nobody else was around.
And yet he executed himself in a manner that the most ternble criminal
who ever lived would not deserve!

He had no feet anymore, which must have been depressing. But having no
feet is no reason for a man to disembowel himself.

It had to have been the atom bomb that was dropped on him during his
formative years, and not the absence of feet, that made him feel that
life was a crock of doo-doo.


As I have said, he did not tell me that he had been atom-bombed until
we had known each other for 2 years or more. He might never have told
me about it, in my opinion, if a documentary about the Japanese "Rape
of Nanking" hadn't been shown on the prison

TVs the day before. This was a program chosen at random from the
prison library. A guard who did the choosing couldn't read English
well enough to know what the convicts would see next. So there was no
censorship.

The Warden had a small TV monitor on his desk, and I knew he watched
it from time to time, since he often remarked to me about the inanity
of this or that old show, and especially I Love Lucy.


The Rape of Nanking was just one more instance of soldiers
slaughtering prisoners and unarmed civilians, but it became famous
because it was among the first to be well photographed. There were
evidently movie cameras everywhere, run by gosh knows whom, and the
footage wasn't confiscated afterward.

I had seen some of the footage when I was a cadet, but not as a part
of a well-edited documentary, with a baritone voice-over and
appropriate music underneath.

The orgy of butchery followed a virtually unopposed attack by the
Japanese Army on the Chinese city of Nanking in 1937, long before this
country became part of the Finale Rack. Hiroshi Matsumoto had just
been born. Prisoners were tied to stakes and used for bayonet
practice. Several people in a pit were buried alive. You could see
their expressions as the dirt hit their faces.

Their faces disappeared, but the dirt on top kept moving as though
there were some sort of burrowing animal, a woodchuck maybe, making a
home below.

Unforgettable!


How was that for racism?

The documentary was a big hit in the prison. Alton Darwin said to me,
I remember, "If somebody is going to do it, I am going to watch it."

This was 7 years before the prison break.


I didn't know if Hiroshi had seen the show on his monitor or not. I
wasn't about to ask. We were not pals.

I was willing to be a pal, if that was part of the job. I believe he
moved me in next door to him with the idea that it was time he had a
pal. My guess is that he never had had a pal. No sooner had I become
his neighbor, I think, than he decided he didn't want a pal after all.
That didn't have anything to do with what I was or how I acted. To
him, I think, a pal was like a piece of merchandise heavily promoted
at Christmas, say. Why junk up his life with such a cumbersome
contraption and all its accessories merely because it was advertised?

So he went on hiking alone and boating alone and eating alone, which
was OK with me. I had a rich social life across the lake.


But the day after the documentary was shown, late in the afternoon,
about suppertime, I was rowing for shore in my fiberglass umiak,
headed for the mud beach in front of our 2 houses in the ghost town. I
had been fishing. I hadn't been to Scipio. My own 2 great pals over
there, Muriel Peck and Damon Stern, were on vacation. They wouldn't be
back until Freshman Orientation Week, before the start of the fall
semester.

The Warden was waiting for me on the beach, looking out at me in my
crazy boat like a mother who had been worried to death about where her
little boy had gone. Had I failed to keep a date with him? No. We had
never had a date. My best supposition was that Mildred or Margaret had
tried to burn 1 of our houses down.

But he said to me as I disembarked, "There is something you should
know about me."

There was no pressing reason why I should know anything about him. We
didn't work as a team up at the prison. He didn't care what or how I
taught up there.

"I was in Hiroshima when it was bombed," he said. I am sure there was
an implied equation there: The bombing of Hiroshima was as
unforgivable and as typically human as the Rape of Nanking.

So I heard about his going into a ditch after a ball when he was a
schoolboy, about his straightening up to find that nobody was alive
but him.

And on and on.

When he was through with that story he said to me, "I thought you
should know."


I said earlier that I had a sudden attack of psychosomatic hives when
Rob Roy Fenstermaker told me that he had been busted for molesting
children. That wasn't my first such attack. The first was when Hiroshi
told me about being atom-bombed. I suddenly itched all over, and
scratching wouldn't help.

And I said to Hiroshi what I would say to Rob Roy:

"I thank you for sharing that with me."

This was an expression, if I am not mistaken, which originated in
California.


I was tempted to show Hiroshi "The Protocols of the Elders of
Tralfamadore." I'm glad I didn't. I might now be feeling a little bit
responsible for his suicide. He might have left a note saying: "The
Elders of Tralfamadore win again!"

Only I and the author of that story, if he is still alive, would have
known what he meant by that.


The most troubling part of his tale about the vaporization of all he
knew and loved had to do with the edge of the area of the blast. There
were all these people dying in agony. And he was only a little boy,
remember.

That must have been for him like walking down the Appian Way back in
71 B.C., when 6,000 nobodies had just been crucified there. Some
little kid or maybe a lot of little kids may have walked down that
road back then. What could a little kid say on such an occasion?
"Daddy, I think I have to go to the bathroom"?


It so happens that my lawyer is on a first-name basis with our
Ambassador to Japan, former Senator Randolph Nakayama of California.
They are of different generations, but my lawyer was a roommate of the
Senator's son at Reed College out in Portland, Oregon, the town where
Tex bought his trusty rifle.

My lawyer told me that both sets of the Senator's racially Japanese
grandparents, one set immigrants, the other set native Californians,
were put into a concentration camp when this country got into the
Finale Rack. The camp, incidentally, was only a few kilometers west of
the Donner Pass, named in honor of White cannibals. The feeling back
then was that anybody with Japanese genes inside our borders was
probably less loyal to the United States Constitution than to
Hirohito, the Emperor of Japan.

The Senator's father, however, served in an infantry battalion
composed entirely of young Americans of Japanese extraction, which
became our most decorated unit taking part in the Italian Campaign
during, again, the Finale Rack.

So I asked my lawyer to find out from the Ambassador if Hiroshi had
left a note, and if there had been an autopsy performed to determine
whether or not the deceased had ingested some foreign substance that
might have made hara-kiri easier. I don't know whether to call this
friendship or morbid curiosity.

The answer came back that there was no note, and that there had been
no autopsy, since the cause of death was so horribly obvious. There
was this detail: A little girl who didn't know him was the first
person of any age or sex to see what he had chosen to do to himself.

She ran and told her mama.


Back when we were neighbors, I asked the Warden why he never left this
valley, why he didn't get away from the prison and me and the ignorant
young guards and the bells across the lake and all the rest of it. He
had years of leave time he had never used.

He said, "I would only meet more people."

"You don't like any kind of people?" I said. We were talking in a sort
of joshing mode, so I could ask him that.

"I wish I had been born a bird instead," he said. "I wish we had all
been born birds instead."


He never killed anybody and had the sex life of a calf kept alive for
its veal alone.

I have lived more vividly, and I promised to tell at the end of this
book the number I would like engraved on my tombstone, a number that
represents both my 100-percent-legal military kills and my adulteries.

If people hear of the number at the end and its double significance,
some will turn to the end to learn the number in order to decide that
it is too small or too big or just about right or whatever without
reading the book. But I have devised a lock to thwart them. I have
concealed its oddly shaped key in a problem that only those who have
read the whole book will have no trouble solving.

So:

Take the year Eugene Debs died.


Subtract the title of the science fiction movie based on a novel by
Arthur C. Clarke which I saw twice in Vietnam. Do not panic. This will
give you a negative number, but Arabs in olden times taught us how to
deal with such.

Add the year of Hitler's birth. There! Everything is nice and positive
again. If you have done everything right so far, you should have the
year in which Napoleon was banished to Elba and the metronome was
invented, neither event, however, discussed in this book.

Add the gestation period of an opossum expressed in days. That isn't
in the book, either, so I make you a gift of it. The number is 12.
That will bring you to the year in which Thomas Jefferson, the former
slave owner, died and James Fenimore Cooper published The Last of the
Mohicans, which wasn't set in this valley but might as well have been.

Divide by the square root of 4.

Subtract 100 times 9.

Add the greatest number of children known to have come from the womb
of just 1 woman, and there you are, by gosh.

Just because some of us can read and write and do a little math, that
doesn't mean we deserve to conquer the Universe.



END
